-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 JySTeP6yRsFer0hga1NIietWx5p7uCH7icdIfChMOue1x1Ox6MCwTZxlLVk0EjMJ
 474mw+ne9gH6aO8VvJ8osg==

0000006201-09-000009.txt : 20090219
0000006201-09-000009.hdr.sgml : 20090219
20090219160727
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0000006201-09-000009
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		70
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	20081231
FILED AS OF DATE:		20090219
DATE AS OF CHANGE:		20090219

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			AMR CORP
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000006201
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED [4512]
		IRS NUMBER:				751825172
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			DE
		FISCAL YEAR END:			0120

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K
		SEC ACT:		1934 Act
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	001-08400
		FILM NUMBER:		09621784

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		4333 AMON CARTER BLVD
		CITY:			FORT WORTH
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			76155
		BUSINESS PHONE:		8179631234

	MAIL ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		4333 AMON CARTER BLVD
		CITY:			FORT WORTH
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			75261-9616


10-K
1
ar120810k.htm
AMR CORPORATION

ar120810k.htm







United
States
Securities
and Exchange Commission
            
Washington, D.C.
20549           

Form
10-K

þ  Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the
fiscal year ended December 31, 2008
 
 ¨  Transition
Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934
 
Commission
File Number:  1-8400
AMR
Corporation
(Exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)




Delaware

 
      

75-1825172




(State
      or other jurisdiction of
incorporation
      or organization)

 
      

(IRS
      Employer
Identification
      Number)




4333
Amon Carter Blvd.
Fort
Worth, Texas 76155
(Address
of principal executive offices, including zip code)

(817)
963-1234
(Registrant’s
telephone number, including area code)_____________________________
Securities
registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 




Title
      of Each Class

 
      

Name
      of Exchange on Which Registered




Common
      Stock, $1 par value per share

 
      

New
      York Stock Exchange




9.00%
      Debentures due 2016

 
      

New
      York Stock Exchange




7.875%
      Public Income Notes due 2039

 
      

New
      York Stock Exchange




 
Securities
registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
            
        
 None                          

Indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in
Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
þ
Yes    ¨
No
 
Indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to
Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.
¨
Yes    þ
No
 
Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be
filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required
to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days.   þ  Yes   ¨  No
 
Indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not
contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the registrant’s
knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by
reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form
10-K.   o
 
Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company.  See definition of “accelerated filer,” “large accelerated
filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange
Act.
 
Large Accelerated Filer
þ                                                                                     Accelerated
Filer ¨
Non-accelerated Filer ¨                                                                       
              Smaller
reporting company ¨
 
Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule
12b-2 of the Act).  ¨
Yes  þ
No
 
The
aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the
registrant as of June 30, 2008, was approximately $1.3 billion.  As of
February 11, 2009, 279,005,677 shares of the registrant’s common stock were
outstanding.

DOCUMENTS
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III
of this Form 10-K incorporates by reference certain information from the Proxy
Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be held May 20,
2009.

 






 







PART
      I





ITEM
1.                 BUSINESS

AMR
Corporation (AMR or the Company) was incorporated in October
1982.  AMR’s operations fall almost entirely in the airline
industry.  AMR's principal subsidiary, American Airlines, Inc.
(American), was founded in 1934.  At the end of 2008, American
provided scheduled jet service to approximately 150 destinations throughout
North America, the Caribbean, Latin America, Europe and Asia.

American, AMR Eagle Holding Corporation (AMR
Eagle) and the
AmericanConnection® airlines serve 250 cities in 40 countries with, on average,
more than 3,400 daily flights. The combined network fleet numbers approximately
900 aircraft.  American Airlines is also a founding member of
oneworld® Alliance, which enables member
airlines to offer their customers more services and benefits than any member
airline can provide individually. These services include a broader route
network, opportunities to earn and redeem frequent flyer miles across the
combined oneworld network and more airport
lounges.  Together, oneworld members serve nearly 700
destinations in over 150 countries, with 8,500 daily departures. American is also one of the largest
scheduled air freight carriers in the world, providing a wide range of freight
and mail services to shippers throughout its system onboard American’s passenger
fleet.

AMR
Eagle, a wholly-owned subsidiary of AMR, owns two regional airlines which do
business as "American Eagle” – American Eagle Airlines, Inc. and Executive
Airlines, Inc. (Executive) (collectively, the American Eagle
carriers).  American also contracts with two independently owned
regional airlines, which do business as “AmericanConnection” (the
AmericanConnection® carriers). The American Eagle carriers and the
AmericanConnection® carriers provide connecting service from ten of American's
high-traffic cities to smaller markets throughout the United States, Canada,
Mexico and the Caribbean.

The AMR
Eagle fleet is operated to feed passenger traffic to American pursuant to a
capacity purchase agreement between American and AMR Eagle under which American
receives all passenger revenue from flights and pays AMR Eagle a fee for each
flight.  The capacity purchase agreement reflects what the Company
believes are current market rates received by other regional carriers for
similar flying.  Amounts paid to AMR Eagle under the capacity purchase
agreement are for various operating expenses of AMR Eagle, such as crew
expenses, maintenance and aircraft ownership, some of which are calculated based
on specific operating statistics (e.g. block hours, departures) and others of
which are fixed monthly amounts.  This capacity purchase agreement was
renewed in July 2008.  As of December 31, 2008, AMR Eagle operated
over 1,400 daily departures, offering scheduled passenger service to over 150
destinations in North America, Mexico and the Caribbean.  On a
separate company basis, AMR Eagle reported $2.5 billion in revenue and $30
million of income before income taxes in 2008.  However, this
historical financial information is not indicative of what AMR Eagle’s future
results of operations, financial position and cash flows might be if AMR Eagle
was a stand-alone entity.
 
Recent
Events

The
Company recorded a net loss of $2.1 billion in 2008 compared to net earnings of
$504 million in 2007.  These results reflect a dramatic year-over-year
increase in fuel prices from an average of $2.13 per gallon in 2007 to an
average of $3.03 per gallon in 2008.   Fuel expense was the
Company’s largest single expense category and the fuel price increase resulted
in $2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel expense in 2008 (based on the
year-over-year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied by gallons
consumed).  In addition, the Company paid 11.7 cents more per gallon
in 2007 than in 2006, which drove a $268 million negative impact to fuel expense
in 2007.  Although fuel prices have abated considerably from the
record prices recorded in July 2008, fuel prices remain
volatile.  Fuel price volatility, additional increases in the price of
fuel, and/or disruptions in the supply of fuel would further adversely affect
the Company’s financial condition and its results of operations.

The
significant rise in fuel price was partially offset by higher unit revenues
(passenger revenue per available seat mile).  Mainline passenger unit
revenues increased 7.3 percent in 2008 due to an 8.6 percent increase in
passenger yield (passenger revenue per passenger mile) partially offset by a 0.9
point load factor decrease compared to 2007.  Although passenger yield
showed year-over-year improvement, passenger yield remains essentially flat with
2000 levels, despite cumulative inflation of approximately 25 percent over the
same time frame.



 



 






 



In
addition, the Company’s 2008 operating results were impacted by three special
items:





·  


In
      the second quarter, the Company announced capacity reductions due to
      unprecedented high fuel costs and the other challenges facing the
      industry.  In connection with these capacity reductions, the
      Company concluded that a triggering event had occurred, requiring that
      fixed assets be tested for impairment.   As a result of
      this test, the Company concluded the carrying values of its McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80 and the Embraer RJ-135 aircraft fleets were no longer
      recoverable. Consequently, the 2008 results include an impairment charge
      of $1.1 billion to write these and certain related long-lived assets down
      to their estimated fair values.  Also in connection with these
      capacity reductions, the Company recorded $71 million in expense for
      employee severance costs and a $33 million expense related to the
      grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft prior to lease
      expiration.  These charges are described in Note 2 to the
      consolidated financial statements.









·  


The
      Company completed the sale of American Beacon Advisors (American Beacon)
      receiving total proceeds of $442 million and realizing a net gain of $432
      million.  This transaction is described in Note 14 to the
      consolidated financial statements.









·  


AMR
      recorded a settlement charge totaling $103 million related to lump sum
      distributions from the Company’s defined benefit pension plans to pilots
      who retired.  Pilot retirements resulted in $917 million in
      total lump sum payments to pilot retirees.  The charge is
      further described in Note 10 to the consolidated financial
      statements.





In August
2008, AMR retired, by purchasing with cash, $75 million of the $300 million
principal amount of the 4.25 percent senior convertible notes due 2023 (the 4.25
Notes).  In September 2008, the remaining holders of the 4.25 Notes
exercised their elective put rights and the Company purchased and retired these
notes at a price equal to 100 percent of their principal amount, totaling $225
million.  Under the terms of the 4.25 Notes, the Company had the
option to pay the purchase price with cash, stock, or a combination of cash and
stock, and the Company elected to pay for the 4.25 Notes solely with
cash.

AMR
continues to take steps to strengthen its balance sheet, and in the third
quarter of 2008 issued 27.1 million shares of common stock generating net
proceeds of $294 million.  The Company reduced long-term debt and
capital lease obligations (including current maturities) by $185 million during
the year and ended the year with $3.1 billion in unrestricted cash and
short-term investments and $459 million in restricted cash and short-term
investments.  In 2008, American also raised approximately $500 million
under a loan secured by aircraft, due in installments through 2015, and raised
approximately $424 million utilizing various transactions including additional
loans secured by aircraft and sale leasebacks of certain aircraft, including
regional aircraft.

In 2008,
American entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing
arrangements with the UK carrier British Airways and the Spanish carrier Iberia,
providing for commercial cooperation by the carriers on flights between North
America (consisting of the United States, Canada and Mexico) and Europe
(consisting of the European Union, Switzerland and Norway) and
beyond.  The agreement contemplates the pooling and sharing of certain
revenues and costs on transatlantic flights, expanded codesharing on each
other’s flights, enhanced frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in
the areas of planning, marketing and certain operations.  The
agreement was signed in connection with an application to the U.S. Department of
Transportation by the carriers for antitrust immunity to permit global
cooperation.  The application also included the Finnish carrier,
Finnair, and the Jordanian carrier, Royal Jordanian.  If granted
(which cannot be assured), antitrust immunity would permit the five carriers,
all of whom are members of the oneworld airline alliance, to
deepen cooperation on a bilateral and multilateral
basis.  Implementation of the joint business agreement and related
arrangements is subject to conditions, including various U.S. and foreign
regulatory approvals, successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and
commercial arrangements, and other approvals.  Agencies from which
regulatory approvals must be obtained may impose requirements or limitations as
a condition of granting such approvals, such as requiring divestiture of routes,
gates, slots or other assets.

The
Company continued its fleet renewal strategy during 2008 as it entered into
amendments to its 737-800 purchase agreement with the Boeing
Company.   Giving effect to the amendments and considering the
impact of delays caused by the recent machinist strike at Boeing, the Company is
now committed to take delivery of a total of 29 737-800 aircraft in 2009, 39
737-800 aircraft in 2010 and eight 737-800 aircraft in 2011.  These
orders are in addition to eleven 737-800 aircraft and seven Boeing 777 aircraft
scheduled to be delivered in 2013 – 2016.


















The
Company also entered into a new purchase agreement with Boeing for the
acquisition of 42 Boeing 787-9 aircraft.  The Boeing 787-9
purchase agreement contains certain contingency provisions, including provisions
which allow American to cancel the contract under certain circumstances, which
are described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources subsection of Item
7.  “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations”.
 
The
Company’s ability to return to profitability and its ability to continue to fund
its obligations on an ongoing basis will depend on a number of factors, many of
which are largely beyond the Company’s control.  Certain risk factors
that affect the Company’s business and financial results are discussed in the
Risk Factors listed in Item 1A.  In addition, most of the Company’s
largest domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have filed for
bankruptcy in recent years and have used this process to significantly reduce
contractual labor and other costs.  In order to remain competitive and
to improve its financial condition, the Company must continue to take steps to
generate additional revenues and to reduce its costs.  Although the
Company has a number of initiatives underway to address its cost and revenue
challenges, the ultimate success of these initiatives is not known at this time
and cannot be assured.  It will be very difficult for the Company to
continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis and return to
profitability, if the overall industry revenue environment does not improve
substantially and if fuel prices were to increase and persist for an extended
period at high levels.

Competition

Domestic Air
Transportation   The domestic airline industry is fiercely
competitive.  Currently, any U.S. air carrier deemed fit by the U.S.
Department of Transportation (DOT) is free to operate scheduled passenger
service between any two points within the U.S. and its
possessions.  Most major air carriers have developed hub-and-spoke
systems and schedule patterns in an effort to maximize the revenue potential of
their service.  American operates five hubs: Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW),
Chicago O'Hare, Miami, St. Louis and San Juan, Puerto Rico.  United
Air Lines (United) also has a hub operation at Chicago O'Hare.

The
American Eagle® carriers increase the number of markets the Company serves by
providing connections at American’s hubs and certain other major airports –
Boston, Los Angeles, Raleigh/Durham and New York’s LaGuardia (LGA) and John F.
Kennedy International (JFK) Airports.  The AmericanConnection®
carriers provide connecting service to American through St.
Louis.  American's competitors also own or have marketing agreements
with regional carriers which provide similar services at their major hubs and
other locations.

On most
of its domestic non-stop routes, the Company faces competing service from at
least one, and sometimes more than one, domestic airline including: AirTran
Airways (Air Tran), Alaska Airlines (Alaska), Continental Airlines
(Continental), Delta Air Lines (including Northwest Airlines) (Delta), Frontier
Airlines, JetBlue Airways (JetBlue), Southwest Airlines (Southwest), United, US
Airways, Virgin America Airlines and their affiliated regional
carriers.  Competition is even greater between cities that require a
connection, where the major airlines compete via their respective
hubs.  In addition, the Company faces competition on some of its
connecting routes from carriers operating point-to-point service on such
routes.  The Company also competes with all-cargo and charter carriers
and, particularly on shorter segments, ground and rail
transportation.  On all of its routes, pricing decisions are affected,
in large part, by the need to meet competition from other airlines.

Most of
the Company’s largest domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have
reorganized under the protection of Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code
(Chapter 11) in recent years.  It is possible that one or more of our
competitors may seek to reorganize in or out of Chapter
11.  Successful reorganizations present the Company with competitors
with significantly lower operating costs derived from renegotiated labor, supply
and financing contracts.

International Air
Transportation   In addition to its extensive domestic
service, the Company provides international service to the Caribbean, Canada,
Latin America, Europe and Asia.  The Company's operating revenues from
foreign operations were approximately 40 percent of the Company’s total
operating revenues in 2008, and 37 percent of the Company’s total operating
revenues in both 2007 and 2006.  Additional information about the
Company's foreign operations is included in Note 14 to the consolidated
financial statements.



 



 






 



In
providing international air transportation, the Company competes with foreign
investor-owned carriers, foreign state-owned carriers and U.S. airlines that
have been granted authority to provide scheduled passenger and cargo service
between the U.S. and various overseas locations.  In general, carriers
that have the greatest ability to seamlessly connect passengers to and from
markets beyond the nonstop city pair have a competitive advantage.  In
some cases, however, foreign governments limit U.S. air carriers' rights to
carry passengers beyond designated gateway cities in foreign
countries.  To improve access to each other's markets, various U.S.
and foreign air carriers – including American – have established marketing
relationships with other airlines and rail companies.  American
currently has marketing relationships with Air Pacific, Air Tahiti Nui, Alaska
Airlines, British Airways, Brussels Airlines, Cathay Pacific, China Eastern
Airlines, Dragonair, Deutsche Bahn German Rail, EL AL, EVA Air, Finnair, Gulf
Air, Hawaiian Airlines, Iberia, Japan Airlines, Jet Airways, LAN (includes LAN
Airlines, LAN Argentina, LAN Ecuador and LAN Peru), Malév Hungarian Airlines,
Mexicana, Qantas Airways, Royal Jordanian, SNCF French Rail and Vietnam
Airlines.

American
is also a founding member of the oneworld alliance, which
includes British Airways, Cathay Pacific, Finnair, Lan Airlines, Iberia, Qantas,
Japan Airlines, Malév Hungarian, Dragonair, and Royal
Jordanian.   Mexicana Airlines has accepted an invitation to join
oneworld and formal entry into the alliance is anticipated in
2009.  The oneworld alliance links the
networks of the member carriers to enhance customer service and smooth
connections to the destinations served by the alliance, including linking the
carriers' frequent flyer programs and access to the carriers' airport lounge
facilities.  Several of American's major competitors are members of
marketing/operational alliances that enjoy antitrust
immunity.  American and British Airways, the largest members of the
oneworld alliance, are
restricted in their relationship because they lack antitrust
immunity.  They are, therefore, at a competitive disadvantage
vis-à-vis other alliances that have antitrust immunity.

In 2008,
American entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing
arrangements with British Airways and Iberia providing for commercial
cooperation by the carriers on flights between North America and Europe and
beyond.  The agreement was signed in connection with an application to
the U.S. Department of Transportation by the three carriers, and Finnair and
Royal Jordanian, for antitrust immunity to permit global
cooperation.  If granted (which cannot be assured), antitrust immunity
will permit the five carriers, all of whom are members of the oneworld airline alliance, to
deepen cooperation on a bilateral and multilateral basis.

Price
Competition   The airline industry is characterized by
substantial and intense price competition. Fare discounting by competitors has
historically had a negative effect on the Company’s financial results because
the Company is generally required to match competitors' fares, as failing to
match would provide even less revenue due to customers’ price
sensitivity.

In recent
years, a number of low-cost carriers (LCCs) have entered the domestic
market.  Several major airlines, including the Company, have
implemented efforts to lower their costs since lower cost structures enable
airlines to offer lower fares.  In addition, several air carriers have
recently reorganized under Chapter 11, including United, Delta and US
Airways.  These cost reduction efforts and bankruptcy reorganizations
have allowed carriers to decrease operating costs.  In the past, lower
cost structures have generally resulted in fare reductions.  If fare
reductions are not offset by increases in passenger traffic, changes in the mix
of traffic that improve yields (passenger revenue per passenger mile) and/or
cost reductions, the Company’s operating results will be negatively
impacted.

Regulation

General   The
Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, as amended, eliminated most domestic economic
regulation of passenger and freight transportation.  However, the DOT
and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) still exercise certain regulatory
authority over air carriers.  The DOT maintains jurisdiction over the
approval of international codeshare agreements, international route authorities
and certain consumer protection and competition matters, such as advertising,
denied boarding compensation and baggage liability.

The FAA
regulates flying operations generally, including establishing standards for
personnel, aircraft and certain security measures.  As part of that
oversight, the FAA has implemented a number of requirements that the Company has
incorporated and is incorporating into its maintenance programs.  The
Company is progressing toward the completion of over 200 airworthiness
directives including Boeing fuel tank safety directives, Boeing 757 and Boeing
767 pylon improvements, McDonnell Douglas MD-80 over-wing frame and aft pressure
bulkhead improvements, Boeing 737 aft pressure bulkhead improvements and Airbus
A300 fuselage structural improvements.  Based on its current
implementation schedule, the Company expects to be in compliance with the
applicable requirements within the required time periods.


















 
The
Department of Justice (DOJ) has jurisdiction over airline antitrust
matters.  The U.S. Postal Service has jurisdiction over certain
aspects of the transportation of mail and related services.  Labor
relations in the air transportation industry are regulated under the Railway
Labor Act, which vests in the National Mediation Board certain functions with
respect to disputes between airlines and labor unions relating to union
representation and collective bargaining agreements.
 
On
December 21, 2007, a New York federal judge
dismissed the Air Transport Association‘s (ATA) challenge to a recently enacted
New York law requiring airlines to provide certain services to onboard
passengers whose flights are delayed on the ground prior to takeoff for more
than three hours.  The ATA appealed the dismissal of the
challenge.  The Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed and ordered
the District Court to enter judgment for the ATA on the grounds that the
legislation was preempted by federal law.  The law, which was briefly
in effect, was declared invalid.
 

International   International
air transportation is subject to extensive government regulation. The Company's
operating authority in international markets is subject to aviation agreements
between the U.S. and the respective countries or governmental authorities (such
as the European Union), and in some cases, fares and schedules require the
approval of the DOT and/or the relevant foreign
governments.  Moreover, alliances with international carriers may be
subject to the jurisdiction and regulations of various foreign
agencies.  Bilateral agreements between the U.S. and various foreign
governments of countries served by the Company are periodically subject to
renegotiation.  Changes in U.S. or foreign government aviation
policies could result in the alteration or termination of such agreements,
diminish the value of route authorities, or otherwise adversely affect the
Company's international operations. In addition, at some foreign airports, an
air carrier needs slots (landing and take-off authorizations) before the air
carrier can introduce new service or increase existing service.  The
availability of such slots is not assured and the inability of the Company to
obtain and retain needed slots could therefore inhibit its efforts to compete in
certain international markets.

In April
2007, the United States and the European Union (EU) approved an “open skies” air
services agreement that provides airlines from the United States and EU member
states open access to each other’s markets, with freedom of pricing and
unlimited rights to fly beyond the United States and any airport in the EU
including London’s Heathrow Airport.  The provisions of the agreement
took effect on March 30, 2008.  Under the agreement, every U.S. and EU
airline is authorized to operate between airports in the United States and
Heathrow.  Notwithstanding the open skies agreement, Heathrow is a
slot-controlled airport.  Only three airlines besides American were
previously allowed to provide service to Heathrow.  The agreement has
resulted in the Company facing increased competition in serving Heathrow, where
the Company has lost market share.  In addition, the Company is facing
additional competition in other European markets.  See Item 1A, Risk
Factors, and Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.

Security   In
November 2001, the Aviation and Transportation Security Act (ATSA) was enacted
in the United States.  The ATSA created a new government agency, the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA), which is part of the Department of
Homeland Security and is responsible for aviation security.  The ATSA
mandates that the TSA provide for the screening of all passengers and property,
including U.S. mail, cargo, carry-on and checked baggage, and other articles
that will be carried aboard a passenger aircraft. The ATSA also provides for
security in flight decks of aircraft and requires federal air marshals to be
present on certain flights.

Effective
February 1, 2002, the ATSA imposed a $2.50 per enplanement security service fee,
which is being collected by the air carriers and submitted to the government to
pay for these enhanced security measures. Additionally, air carriers are
annually required to submit to the government an amount equal to what the air
carriers paid for screening passengers and property in 2000.  In
recent years, the government has sought to increase both of these fees under
spending proposals for the Department of Homeland Security. American and other
carriers have announced their opposition to these proposals as there is no
assurance that any increase in fees could be passed on to
customers.

Airline
Fares   Airlines are permitted to establish their own
domestic fares without governmental regulation. The DOT maintains authority over
certain international fares, rates and charges, but applies this authority on a
limited basis.  In addition, international fares and rates are
sometimes subject to the jurisdiction of the governments of the foreign
countries which the Company serves.  While air carriers are required
to file and adhere to international fare and rate tariffs, substantial
commissions, fare overrides and discounts to travel agents, brokers and
wholesalers characterize many international markets.


 



 






 



Airport Access 
 Historically, the FAA designated JFK, LGA and Washington Reagan
airports as high-density traffic airports.  The high-density rule limited
the number of Instrument Flight Rule operations - take-offs and landings -
permitted per hour and required that a “take-off/landing slot right” support
each operation.  The high density rule was repealed for JFK and LGA;
however both airports remain subject to operating restrictions.

In order
to remedy congestion at LGA due to elimination of slot restrictions, the FAA, in
2007, placed caps on total operations and required carriers at LGA to hold
operating authorizations.  In January 2009, the FAA announced a
voluntary program at LGA aimed at reducing hourly scheduled operations at LGA
from 75 to 71, which is expected to help ease congestion and delay without
materially affecting carrier operations.

In
December 2007, the United States Department of Transportation reached an
agreement with domestic airlines to ease congestion at JFK by shifting the
timing of certain flights.  Such re-timing has not had a significant
impact on the Company’s flights to or from JFK. 

In late
2008, the FAA issued new rules for carriers operating at LGA, JFK and Newark
that would fundamentally change the manner in which operating authorizations are
held and distributed at those airports.  Every departure and landing would
require an authorization and existing carriers would be requested to reduce
service to provide authorizations for auction to other carriers without
increasing total airport operations.  The Company, along with numerous
other carriers and interested parties, opposed adoption of these
rules.  Immediately after the rules were issued, the ATA and others
petitioned for judicial review in the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit challenging the rules and seeking a stay
(preliminary injunction) against their implementation.  The court granted
the stay motion, thus blocking the rules from taking effect, pending the court’s
ultimate decision on the merits.  Following the change in
Administrations on January 20, 2009, the ATA submitted a letter to the new
Secretary of Transportation urging that the rules be withdrawn.  If
the DOT does not withdraw the rules, or if the court challenge is unsuccessful,
the new rules could require the Company to alter the routes and services it
currently operates at LGA, JFK and Newark with potentially material adverse
effects.

In 2006,
the FAA issued an order requiring that carriers hold arrival authorizations to
land during certain hours at Chicago O’Hare.  That order limits the
purchase or sale of arrival authorizations. The Company has not experienced any
significant adverse impact from this order.  In addition, the DOT is
considering imposing a schedule reduction order at Newark (separately from the
FAA action above), which could include slot controls at that airport.  The
Company does not anticipate being materially affected if such an order is
imposed.

The
high-density rule remains in effect at Washington Reagan.  Legislation
has been introduced to abolish the perimeter rule at that airport, which (with
exceptions) limits nonstop flights to a distance of 1,250 miles.  Some
foreign airports, including Heathrow, a major European destination for American,
also require slot allocations. 

Although
the Company is constrained by slots, it currently has sufficient slot
authorizations to operate its existing flights.  However, there is no
assurance that the Company will be able to retain or obtain slots in the future
to expand its operations or change its schedules because, among other factors,
slot allocations are subject to changes in government policies.

In 2006,
the Wright Amendment Reform Act of 2006 (the Act) became law.  The Act
is based on an agreement by the cities of Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas, DFW
International Airport, Southwest, and the Company to modify the Wright
Amendment, which authorizes certain flight operations at Dallas Love Field
within defined geographic areas.  Among other things, the Act
eventually eliminates domestic geographic restrictions on operations while
limiting the maximum number of gates at Love Field.  The Company
believes the Act is a pragmatic resolution of the issues related to the Wright
Amendment and the use of Love Field.



 



 






 



Environmental
Matters   The Company is subject to various laws and
government regulations concerning environmental matters and employee safety and
health in the U.S. and other countries.  U.S. federal laws that have a
particular impact on the Company include the Airport Noise and Capacity Act of
1990 (ANCA), the Clean Air Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the
Clean Water Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA or the Superfund
Act).  Certain operations of the Company are also subject to the
oversight of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) concerning
employee safety and health matters.  The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), OSHA, and other federal agencies have been authorized to
promulgate regulations that have an impact on the Company's
operations.  In addition to these federal activities, various states
have been delegated certain authorities under the aforementioned federal
statutes.  Many state and local governments have adopted environmental
and employee safety and health laws and regulations, some of which are similar
to or stricter than federal requirements.

The ANCA
recognizes the rights of airport operators with noise problems to implement
local noise abatement programs so long as they do not interfere unreasonably
with interstate or foreign commerce or the national air transportation
system.  Authorities in several cities have promulgated aircraft noise
reduction programs, including the imposition of nighttime
curfews.  The ANCA generally requires FAA approval of local noise
restrictions on aircraft.  While the Company has had sufficient
scheduling flexibility to accommodate local noise restrictions imposed to date,
the Company’s operations could be adversely affected if locally-imposed
regulations become more restrictive or widespread.

Many
aspects of the Company’s operations are subject to increasingly stringent
environmental regulations.  Concerns about climate change and greenhouse
gas emissions, in particular, may result in the imposition of additional
legislation or regulation. For example, the EU recently approved measures that
impose emissions limits on airlines with operations to, from or within the EU as
part of an emissions trading system beginning in 2012.  The Company is
currently assessing the potential costs of the EU measures.  Such
legislative or regulatory action by the U.S. or foreign governments currently or
in the future may adversely affect the Company’s business and financial
results.

The
environmental laws to which the Company is subject include those related to
responsibility for potential soil and groundwater contamination.  The
Company is conducting investigation and remediation activities to address soil
and groundwater conditions at several sites, including airports and maintenance
bases.  The Company anticipates that the ongoing costs of such
activities will be immaterial.  The Company has also been named as a
potentially responsible party (PRP) at certain Superfund sites.  The
Company’s alleged volumetric contributions at such sites are small in comparison
to total contributions of all PRPs and the Company expects that any future
payments of its share of costs at such sites will be immaterial.

Labor

The
airline business is labor intensive.  Wages, salaries and benefits
represented approximately 26 percent of the Company’s consolidated operating
expenses for the year ended December 31, 2008.  The average full-time
equivalent number of employees of the Company’s subsidiaries for the year ended
December 31, 2008 was 84,100.

The
majority of these employees are represented by labor unions and covered by
collective bargaining agreements.  Relations with such labor
organizations are governed by the Railway Labor Act (RLA).  Under this
act, the collective bargaining agreements among the Company’s subsidiaries and
these organizations generally do not expire but instead become amendable as of a
stated date.  If either party wishes to modify the terms of any such
agreement, it must notify the other party in the manner agreed to by the
parties.  Under the RLA, after receipt of such notice, the parties
must meet for direct negotiations, and if no agreement is reached, either party
may request the National Mediation Board (NMB) to appoint a federal
mediator.  The RLA prescribes no set timetable for the direct
negotiation and mediation process.  It is not unusual for those
processes to last for many months, and even for several years.  If no
agreement is reached in mediation, the NMB in its discretion may declare at some
time that an impasse exists, and if an impasse is declared, the NMB proffers
binding arbitration to the parties.  Either party may decline to
submit to arbitration.  If arbitration is rejected by either party, a
30-day “cooling off” period commences.  During that period (or after),
a Presidential Emergency Board (PEB) may be established, which examines the
parties’ positions and recommends a solution.  The PEB process lasts
for 30 days and is followed by another “cooling off” period of 30
days.  At the end of a “cooling off” period, unless an agreement is
reached or action is taken by Congress, the labor organization may exercise
“self-help,” such as a strike, and the airline may resort to its own
“self-help,” including the imposition of any or all of its proposed amendments
and the hiring of new employees to replace any striking workers.

 

 






 



In April
2003, American reached agreements (the Labor Agreements) with its three major
unions - the Allied Pilots Association (the APA) which represents American’s
pilots, the Transport Workers Union of America (AFL-CIO) (the TWU), which
represents seven different employee groups, and the Association of Professional
Flight Attendants (the APFA), which represents American’s flight attendants. The
Labor Agreements substantially moderated the labor costs associated with the
employees represented by the unions.  In conjunction with the Labor
Agreements, American also implemented various changes in the pay plans and
benefits for non-unionized personnel, including officers and other management
(the Management Reductions). The Labor Agreements became amendable in 2008
(although the parties agreed that they could begin the negotiations process as
early as 2006).  In 2006, American and the APA commenced negotiations under
the RLA.  In April of 2008, following a request by the APA, a mediator
was appointed by the National Mediation Board.  The parties have been in
mediated negotiations since that time.

Also in
2006, American and the TWU commenced negotiations with respect only to
dispatchers, one of the seven groups at American represented by the TWU. 
Subsequently, following a request by the parties, a mediator was appointed by
the NMB for the dispatcher negotiations.  Thereafter, in November 2007,
American and the TWU commenced negotiations under the RLA with respect to the
other employee groups represented by the TWU.  Direct negotiations between
American and the TWU employees with respect to those other groups continued
until December 2008, at which time the parties jointly filed with the NMB for
mediation with respect to the fleet service, stores, ground school instructors,
and simulator technician groups of employees.  The NMB appointed a mediator
soon thereafter.  Then in January, 2009, the TWU applied to the NMB for the
appointment of a mediator with respect to the mechanics and the technical
specialists.  The NMB will appoint a mediator to assist those negotiations,
as well.

American
and the APFA commenced negotiations in the first half of 2008.  Direct
negotiations between the parties continued until December 2008, at which time
the parties jointly filed an application to the NMB asking that a mediator be
appointed.  The NMB appointed a mediator soon thereafter.

The Air
Line Pilots Association (ALPA), which represents American Eagle pilots, reached
agreement with American Eagle effective September 1, 1997, to have all of the
pilots of the American Eagle® carriers (currently American Eagle Airlines, Inc.
and Executive Airlines, Inc.) covered by a single contract.  This agreement
lasts until January 1, 2013.  The agreement provides to the parties the
right to seek limited changes in 2000, 2004, 2008 and 2012. If the parties are
unable to agree on the limited changes, the agreement provides that any issues
would be resolved by interest arbitration, without the exercise of self-help
(such as a strike).  ALPA and American Eagle negotiated a tentative
agreement in 2000, but that agreement failed in ratification. Thereafter, the
parties participated in interest arbitration. The interest arbitration panel
determined the limited changes that should be made and these changes were
appropriately effected.  In 2004 and in 2008, the parties successfully
negotiated limited changes.  The pilot agreement is amendable January 1,
2013; however, the parties have agreed that contract openers may be exchanged
120 days prior to that date.

The
Association of Flight Attendants (AFA) represents the flight attendants of the
American Eagle carriers. The current agreement between the American Eagle
carriers and the AFA is amendable on October 27, 2009; however, the parties have
agreed that contract openers may be exchanged 90 days prior to that date. 
The other union employees at the American Eagle carriers are covered by separate
agreements with the TWU. The agreements between the American Eagle carriers and
the TWU were amendable beginning on October 1, 2007, and the parties commenced
negotiations.  In January, 2009, an application for mediation was
filed with the NMB.  A mediator from the NMB will be assisting the
parties.



 



 






 



Fuel

The
Company’s operations and financial results are significantly affected by the
availability and price of jet fuel.  The Company's fuel costs and
consumption for the years 2006 through 2008 were:





 
 
 
 
Year

 



 
Gallons
Consumed
(in
      millions)

 
 



 
 
Total
      Cost
(in
      millions)

 
 



Average
      Cost Per Gallon
(in
      dollars)

 
 



Percent
      of AMR's Operating Expenses

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2006

 
 
3,178
 
 
$
6,402
 
 
$
2.014
 
 
 
29.8
%



2007

 
 
3,130
 
 
 
6,670
 
 
 
2.131
 
 
 
30.4
 



2008

 
 
2,971
 
 
 
9,014
 
 
 
3.034
 
 
 
35.1
 





The
impact of fuel price changes on the Company and its competitors depends on
various factors, including hedging strategies.  The Company has a fuel
hedging program in which it enters into jet fuel and heating oil hedging
contracts to dampen the impact of the volatility of jet fuel prices. During
2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company’s fuel hedging program reduced the Company’s
fuel expense by approximately $380 million, $239 million and $97 million,
respectively. As of January 2009, the Company had cash flow hedges, with option
contracts, primarily heating oil collars and call options, covering
approximately 35 percent of its estimated 2009 fuel requirements.  The
consumption hedged for 2009 by cash flow hedges is capped at an average price of
approximately $2.59 per gallon of jet fuel, and the Company’s collars have an
average floor price of approximately $1.94 per gallon of jet fuel (both the
capped and floor price exclude taxes and transportation costs).  As a
result of the rapid decline in energy prices in the second half of 2008 and
certain other events, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months
it will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings
approximately $711 million in net incremental expenses related to its fuel
derivative hedges (based on prices as of December 31, 2008).  A
deterioration of the Company’s financial position could negatively affect the
Company’s ability to hedge fuel in the future. See the Risk Factors under Item
1A for additional information regarding fuel.

Additional
information regarding the Company’s fuel program is also included in Item 7(A)
“Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk,” Item 7
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” and in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.

Frequent Flyer
Program

American
established the AAdvantage® frequent flyer program (AAdvantage) to develop
passenger loyalty by offering awards to travelers for their continued patronage.
The Company believes that the AAdvantage program is one of its competitive
strengths. AAdvantage benefits from a growing base of approximately 62 million
members with desirable demographics who have demonstrated a strong willingness
to collect AAdvantage miles over other loyalty program incentives and are
generally disposed to adjusting their purchasing behavior in order to earn
additional AAdvantage miles.  AAdvantage members earn mileage credits
by flying on American, American Eagle, and the AmericanConnection® carriers or
by using services of other participants in the AAdvantage
program.  Mileage credits can be redeemed for free, discounted or
upgraded travel on American, American Eagle or other participating airlines, or
for other awards.  Once a member accrues sufficient mileage for an
award, the member may book award travel.  Most travel awards are
subject to capacity controlled seating. A member’s mileage credit does not
expire as long as that member has any type of qualifying activity at least once
every 18 months.

American
sells mileage credits and related services to other participants in the
AAdvantage program. There are over 1,000 program participants, including a
leading credit card issuer, hotels, car rental companies and other products and
services companies in the AAdvantage program.  The Company believes
that program participants benefit from the sustained purchasing behavior of
AAdvantage members, which translates into a recurring stream of revenues for
AAdvantage.  Under its agreements with AAdvantage members and program
participants, the Company reserves the right to change the AAdvantage program at
any time without notice, and may end the program with six months
notice.  As of December 31, 2008, AAdvantage had approximately 62
million total members, and 607 billion outstanding award
miles.  During 2008, AAdvantage issued approximately 196 billion
miles, of which approximately one-half were sold to program
participants.  See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” under
Item 7 for more information on AAdvantage.


 



 






 



Other
Matters

Seasonality and Other
Factors   The Company’s results of operations for any
interim period are not necessarily indicative of those for the entire year,
since the air transportation business is subject to seasonal
fluctuations.  Higher demand for air travel has traditionally resulted
in more favorable operating and financial results for the second and third
quarters of the year than for the first and fourth quarters. Fears of terrorism
or war, fare initiatives, fluctuations in fuel prices, labor actions, weather
and other factors could impact this seasonal pattern. Unaudited quarterly
financial data for the two-year period ended December 31, 2008 is included in
Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements.  In addition, the
results of operations in the air transportation business have also significantly
fluctuated in the past in response to general economic conditions.

Insurance   The
Company carries insurance for public liability, passenger liability, property
damage and all-risk coverage for damage to its aircraft.  As a result
of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 (the Terrorist Attacks), aviation
insurers significantly reduced the amount of insurance coverage available to
commercial air carriers for liability to persons other than employees or
passengers for claims resulting from acts of terrorism, war or similar events
(war-risk coverage). At the same time, these insurers significantly increased
the premiums for aviation insurance in general.

The U.S.
government has agreed to provide commercial war-risk insurance for U.S. based
airlines until March 31, 2009, covering losses to employees, passengers, third
parties and aircraft.  Beyond that date, the Secretary of
Transportation has the authority to provide commercial war-risk insurance until
May 31, 2009.  If the U.S. government does not extend the policy
beyond March 31, 2009 (or beyond May 31, 2009 if the Secretary has exercised the
authority to extend coverage to that date), or if the U.S. government at anytime
thereafter ceases to provide such insurance, or reduces the coverage provided by
such insurance, the Company will attempt to purchase similar coverage with
narrower scope from commercial insurers at an additional cost. To the extent
this coverage is not available at commercially reasonable rates, the Company
would be adversely affected. While the price of commercial insurance has
declined since the premium increases immediately after the Terrorist Attacks, in
the event commercial insurance carriers further reduce the amount of insurance
coverage available to the Company, or significantly increase its cost, the
Company would be adversely affected.

Other Government
Matters   In time of war or during a national emergency or
defense oriented situation, American and other air carriers can be required to
provide airlift services to the Air Mobility Command under the Civil Reserve Air
Fleet program. In the event the Company has to provide a substantial number of
aircraft and crew to the Air Mobility Command, its operations could be adversely
impacted.

Available
Information   The Company makes its annual report on Form
10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and
amendments to reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 available free of charge under the Investor
Relations page on its website, www.aa.com, as soon
as reasonably practicable after such reports are electronically filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. In addition, the Company’s code of ethics
(called the Standards of Business Conduct), which applies to all employees of
the Company, including the Company’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief
Financial Officer (CFO) and Controller, is posted under the Investor Relations
page on its website, www.aa.com. The
Company intends to disclose any amendments to the code of ethics, or waivers of
the code of ethics on behalf of the CEO, CFO or Controller, under the Investor
Relations page on the Company’s website, www.aa.com.  The
charters for the AMR Board of Directors’ standing committees (the Audit,
Compensation, Diversity and Nominating/Corporate Governance Committees), as well
as the Board of Directors’ Governance Policies (the Governance Policies), are
likewise available on the Company’s website, www.aa.com.  Upon
request, copies of the charters or the Governance Policies are available at no
cost.  Information on the Company’s website is not incorporated into
or otherwise made a part of this Report.


 



 






 



ITEM
1A.     RISK FACTORS

Our
ability to become profitable and our ability to continue to fund our obligations
on an ongoing basis will depend on a number of risk factors, many of which are
largely beyond our control.  Some of the factors that may have a
negative impact on us are described below:

As a result of significant losses in
recent years, our financial condition has been materially
weakened.
     
We
incurred significant losses in 2001-2005, which materially weakened our
financial condition. We lost $857 million in 2005, $751 million in
2004, $1.2 billion in 2003, $3.5 billion in 2002 and $1.8 billion
in 2001. Although we earned a profit of $504 million in 2007 and $231
million in 2006, we lost $2.1 billion in 2008 (which included a
$1.1 billion impairment charge). Because of our weakened financial
condition, we are vulnerable both to the impact of unexpected events (such as
terrorist attacks or spikes in jet fuel prices) and to deterioration of the
operating environment (such as a deepening of the current global recession or
significant increased competition).

The severe global economic downturn has resulted in
weaker demand for air travel and lower
investment asset returns, which may have a significant negative impact on
us.

We are experiencing significantly weaker demand for air
travel driven by the severe downturn in the global economy.  Many of
the countries we serve are experiencing economic slowdowns or
recessions.  We began to experience weakening demand late in 2008, and
this weakness has continued into 2009.  We reduced capacity in 2008,
and we recently announced further reductions to our 2009 capacity
plan.  If the global economic downturn persists or worsens, demand for
air travel may continue to weaken.  No assurance can be given that
capacity reductions or other steps we may take will be adequate to offset the
effects of reduced demand.

The
economic downturn has resulted in broadly lower investment asset returns and
values, and our pension assets suffered a material decrease in value in 2008
related to broader stock market declines, which will result in higher pension
expense and potentially higher required contributions in future
years.  In addition, under these unfavorable economic conditions, we
may also be required to maintain substantial cash reserves under our credit card
processing agreements.  These issues individually or collectively may
have a material adverse impact on our liquidity. Also, disruptions in the
capital markets and other sources of funding may make it impossible for us to
obtain necessary additional funding or make the cost of that funding
prohibitive.

We face numerous challenges as we
seek to maintain sufficient liquidity, and we will need to raise substantial
additional funds.  We may not be able to raise those funds, or to do
so on acceptable terms.
     
We have
significant debt, lease and other obligations in the next several years,
including significant pension funding obligations.  For example, in
2009 we will be required to make approximately $1.8 billion of principal
payments on long-term debt and approximately $110 million in principal payments
on capital leases, and we expect to make approximately $1.6 billion of capital
expenditures.  In addition, the global economic downturn, potential
increases in the amount of required reserves under credit card processing
agreements, and the obligation to post cash collateral on fuel hedging contracts
have negatively impacted, or may in the future negatively impact, our
liquidity.  To meet our commitments and to maintain sufficient
liquidity as we continue to implement our restructuring and cost reduction
initiatives, we will need continued access to substantial additional funding.
While we have arranged financing that, subject to certain terms and conditions,
covers a majority of our 2009 aircraft deliveries and have arranged backstop
financing which could be used for a significant portion of our remaining 2009 -
2011 Boeing 737-800 aircraft deliveries, we will also need to raise additional
funds to meet our commitments to purchase aircraft and execute our fleet
replacement plan.

Our
ability to obtain future financing is limited by the value of our unencumbered
assets. A very large majority of our aircraft assets (including most of our
aircraft eligible for the benefits of Section 1110 of the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code) are encumbered. Also, the market value of our aircraft assets has declined
in recent years, and may continue to decline.

Since the
Terrorist Attacks of September 2001, our credit ratings have been lowered
to significantly below investment grade. These reductions have increased our
borrowing costs and otherwise adversely affected borrowing terms, and limited
borrowing options. Additional reductions in our credit ratings might have other
effects on us, such as further increasing borrowing or other costs or further
restricting our ability to raise funds.
     


 



 






 



A number
of other factors, including our financial results in recent years, our
substantial indebtedness, the difficult revenue environment we face, our reduced
credit ratings, recent historically high fuel prices, and the financial
difficulties experienced in the airline industry, adversely affect the
availability and terms of funding for us. In
addition, the global economic downturn and recent severe disruptions in the
capital markets and other sources of funding have resulted in greater
volatility, less liquidity, widening of credit spreads, and substantially more
limited availability of funding.  As a result of these factors, there
can be no assurance that additional funding will be available to us on
acceptable terms, if at all. An inability to obtain necessary additional funding
on acceptable terms would have a material adverse impact on us and on our
ability to sustain our operations.

Our initiatives to generate
additional revenues and to reduce our costs may not be adequate or
successful.
    
As we
seek to improve our financial condition, we must continue to take steps to
generate additional revenues and to reduce our costs. Although we have a number
of initiatives underway to address our cost and revenue challenges, some of
these initiatives involve changes to our business which we may be unable to
implement. In addition, we expect that, as time goes on, it will be
progressively more difficult to identify and implement significant revenue
enhancement and cost savings initiatives. The adequacy and ultimate success of
our initiatives to generate additional revenues and reduce our costs are not
known at this time and cannot be assured. Moreover, whether our initiatives will
be adequate or successful depends in large measure on factors beyond our
control, notably the overall industry environment, including passenger demand,
yield and industry capacity growth, and fuel prices.  It will be very difficult for us to continue to fund our
obligations on an ongoing basis, and to return to profitability, if the overall
industry revenue environment does not improve substantially and if fuel prices
were to increase and persist for an extended period at high
levels.

We may be adversely affected by
increases in fuel prices, and we would be adversely affected by disruptions in
the supply of fuel.

Our
results are very significantly affected by the volatile price and the
availability of jet fuel, which are in turn affected by a number of factors
beyond our control.  Fuel prices have only recently declined from
historic high levels.
     
Due to
the competitive nature of the airline industry, we may not be able to pass on
increased fuel prices to customers by increasing fares. Although we had some
success in raising fares and imposing fuel surcharges in reaction to recent high
fuel prices, these fare increases and surcharges did not keep pace with the
extraordinary increases in the price of fuel that occurred in 2007 and 2008.
Furthermore, even though fuel prices have declined significantly from their
recent historic high levels, reduced demand or increased fare competition, or
both,  and resulting lower revenues may offset any potential benefit
of these lower fuel prices.
     
While we
do not currently anticipate a significant reduction in fuel availability,
dependence on foreign imports of crude oil, limited refining capacity and the
possibility of changes in government policy on jet fuel production,
transportation and marketing make it impossible to predict the future
availability of jet fuel. If there are additional outbreaks of hostilities or
other conflicts in oil producing areas or elsewhere, or a reduction in refining
capacity (due to weather events, for example), or governmental limits on the
production or sale of jet fuel, there could be a reduction in the supply of jet
fuel and significant increases in the cost of jet fuel. Major reductions in the
availability of jet fuel or significant increases in its cost would have a
material adverse impact on us.

We have a
large number of older aircraft in our fleet, and these aircraft are not as fuel
efficient as more recent models of aircraft. We believe it is imperative that we
continue to execute our fleet renewal plans.  However, due to the
recent machinist strike at Boeing, deliveries of the Boeing 737-800 aircraft we
currently have on order have been delayed.  In addition, we expect
delays in the deliveries of the Boeing 787-9 aircraft we currently have on
order.

While we
seek to manage the risk of fuel price increases by using derivative contracts,
there can be no assurance that, at any given time, we will have derivatives in
place to provide any particular level of protection against increased fuel
costs. In addition, a deterioration of our financial position could negatively
affect our ability to enter into derivative contracts in the
future.  Moreover, declines in fuel prices below the levels
established in derivative contracts may require us to post cash collateral to
secure the loss positions on such contracts, and if such contracts close when
fuel prices are below the applicable levels, we would be required to make
payments to close such contracts; these payments would be treated as additional
fuel expense.
 












Our indebtedness and other
obligations are substantial and could adversely affect our business and
liquidity.

     
We have
and will continue to have significant amounts of indebtedness, obligations to
make future payments on aircraft equipment and property leases, and obligations
under aircraft purchase agreements, as well as a high proportion of debt to
equity capital.  In 2009, we will be required to make approximately
$1.8 billion of principal payments on long-term debt. We expect to
incur substantial additional debt (including secured debt) and lease obligations
in the future. We also have substantial pension funding obligations. Our
substantial indebtedness and other obligations have important consequences. For
example, they:




 
      

•

 
      

limit
      our ability to obtain additional funding for working capital, capital
      expenditures, acquisitions and general corporate purposes, and adversely
      affect the terms on which such funding can be obtained;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

require
      us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to
      payments on our indebtedness and other obligations, thereby reducing the
      funds available for other purposes;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

make
      us more vulnerable to economic downturns; and



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

limit
      our ability to withstand competitive pressures and reduce our flexibility
      in responding to changing business and economic
  conditions.





We may be unable to comply with our
financial covenants.

As of
December 31, 2008 American had a secured bank credit facility (the Credit
Facility) consisting of a fully drawn $255 million revolving credit
facility with a final maturity on June 17, 2009, and a fully drawn
$436 million term loan facility with a final maturity on December 17,
2010. The Credit Facility contains a liquidity covenant and a covenant that
requires AMR to maintain certain minimum ratios of cash flow to fixed charges
(the EBITDAR covenant). We were in compliance with the liquidity covenant as of
December 31, 2008. In May 2008, we entered into an amendment to the Credit
Facility which waived compliance with the EBITDAR covenant for periods ending on
any date from and including June 30, 2008 and through March 31, 2009,
and which reduced the minimum ratios AMR is required to satisfy thereafter.
Given fuel prices that have been very high by historical standards and the
volatility of fuel prices and revenues, uncertainty in the capital markets and
about other sources of funding, and other
factors, it is difficult to assess whether we will be able to continue to comply
with these covenants, and there are no assurances that we will be able to do so.
Failure to comply with these covenants would result in a default under the
Credit Facility which — if we did not take steps to obtain a waiver of, or
otherwise mitigate, the default — could result in a default under a significant
amount of our other debt and lease obligations, and otherwise have a material
adverse impact on us.

Our business is affected by many
changing economic and other conditions beyond our control, and our results of
operations tend to be volatile and fluctuate due to
seasonality.
     
Our
business and our results of operations are affected by many changing economic
and other conditions beyond our control, including, among others:




 
      

•

 
      

actual
      or potential changes in international, national, regional and local
      economic, business and financial conditions, including recession,
      inflation, higher interest rates, wars, terrorist attacks or political
      instability;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

changes
      in consumer preferences, perceptions, spending patterns or demographic
      trends;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

changes
      in the competitive environment due to industry consolidation and other
      factors;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

actual
      or potential disruptions to the air traffic control systems;
 



 
      

•

 
      

increases
      in costs of safety, security and environmental
measures;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

outbreaks
      of diseases that affect travel behavior; and



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

weather
      and natural disasters.




     
As a
result, our results of operations tend to be volatile and subject to rapid and
unexpected change. In addition, due to generally greater demand for air travel
during the summer, our revenues in the second and third quarters of the year
tend to be stronger than revenues in the first and fourth quarters of the
year.







The airline industry is fiercely
competitive and may undergo further consolidation or changes in industry
alliances, and we are subject to increasing competition.
     
Service
over almost all of our routes is highly competitive and fares remain at low
levels by historical standards. We face vigorous, and, in some cases,
increasing, competition from major domestic airlines, national, regional,
all-cargo and charter carriers, foreign air carriers, low-cost carriers and,
particularly on shorter segments, ground and rail transportation. We also face
increasing and significant competition from marketing/operational alliances
formed by our competitors. The percentage of routes on which we compete with
carriers having substantially lower operating costs than ours has grown
significantly over the past decade, and we now compete with low-cost carriers on
a large majority of our domestic non-stop mainline network routes.
     
Certain
airline alliances have been granted immunity from antitrust regulations by
governmental authorities for specific areas of cooperation, such as joint
pricing decisions. To the extent alliances formed by our competitors can
undertake activities that are not available to us, our ability to effectively
compete may be hindered.
     
Pricing
decisions are significantly affected by competition from other airlines. Fare
discounting by competitors historically has had a negative effect on our
financial results because we must generally match competitors’ fares, since
failing to match would result in even less revenue. We have faced increased
competition from carriers with simplified fare structures, which are generally
preferred by travelers. Any fare reduction or fare simplification initiative may
not be offset by increases in passenger traffic, reduction in cost or changes in
the mix of traffic that would improve yields. Moreover, decisions by our
competitors that increase or reduce overall industry capacity, or capacity
dedicated to a particular domestic or foreign region, market or route, can have
a material impact on related fare levels.
     
There
have been numerous mergers and acquisitions within the airline industry and
numerous changes in industry alliances. Recently, two of our largest
competitors, Delta and Northwest Airlines, merged, and the combined entity
became the largest scheduled passenger airline in the world in terms of
available seat miles and revenue passenger miles.  In addition,
another two of our largest competitors, United and Continental, recently
announced that they had entered into a framework agreement to cooperate
extensively and under which Continental would join the global alliance of which
United, Lufthansa and certain other airlines are members.
     
In the
future, there may be additional mergers and acquisitions, and changes in airline
alliances, including those that may be undertaken in response to the merger of
Delta and Northwest or other developments in the airline industry. Any airline
industry consolidation or changes in airline alliances could substantially alter
the competitive landscape and result in changes in our corporate or business
strategy. We regularly assess and explore the potential for consolidation in our
industry and changes in airline alliances, our strategic position and ways to
enhance our competitiveness, including the possibilities for our participation
in merger activity. Consolidation involving other participants in our industry
could result in the formation of one or more airlines with greater financial
resources, more extensive networks, and/or lower cost structures than exist
currently, which could have a material adverse effect on us. For similar
reasons, changes in airline alliances could also adversely affect our
competitive position.
     
We
recently announced that we have entered into a joint business agreement and
related marketing arrangements with British Airways and Iberia, which provide
for commercial cooperation on flights between North America and most countries
in Europe, pooling and sharing of certain revenues and costs, expanded
codesharing, enhanced frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in
other areas. Along with these carriers and certain other carriers, we have
applied to the U.S. Department of Transportation for antitrust immunity for this
planned cooperation. Implementation of this agreement and the related
arrangements is subject to conditions, including various U.S. and foreign
regulatory approvals, successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and
commercial arrangements, and other approvals. Agencies from which such approvals
must be obtained may impose requirements or limitations as a condition of
granting any such approvals, such as requiring divestiture of routes, gates,
slots or other assets. No assurances can be given as to any arrangements that
may ultimately be implemented or any benefits that we may derive from such
arrangements.

We compete with reorganized carriers,
which results in competitive disadvantages for us.
     
We must
compete with air carriers that have reorganized under the protection of
Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in recent years, including United,
Delta, Northwest and U.S. Airways. It is possible that other significant
competitors may seek to reorganize in or out of Chapter 11.
     


 



 






 



Successful
reorganizations by other carriers present us with competitors with significantly
lower operating costs and stronger financial positions derived from renegotiated
labor, supply, and financing contracts. These competitive pressures may limit
our ability to adequately price our services, may require us to further reduce
our operating costs, and could have a material adverse impact on
us.

Fares are at low levels and our
reduced pricing power adversely affects our ability to achieve adequate pricing,
especially with respect to business travel.
     
While we
have recently been able to implement some fare increases on certain domestic and
international routes, our passenger yield is essentially the same as it was in
2000 despite cumulative inflation of approximately 25 percent since that
time.  We believe that this is due in large part to a corresponding
decline in our pricing power. Our reduced pricing power is the product of
several factors including: greater cost sensitivity on the part of travelers
(particularly business travelers); pricing transparency resulting from the use
of the Internet; greater competition from low-cost carriers and from carriers
that have recently reorganized under the protection of Chapter 11; other
carriers being well hedged against rising fuel costs and able to better absorb
high jet fuel prices; and fare simplification efforts by certain carriers. We
believe that our reduced pricing power could persist indefinitely.

Our corporate or business strategy
may change.
     
In light
of the rapid changes in the airline industry, we evaluate our assets on an
ongoing basis with a view to maximizing their value to us and determining which
are core to our operations. We also regularly evaluate our corporate and
business strategies, and they are influenced by factors beyond our control,
including changes in the competitive landscape we face. Our corporate and
business strategies are, therefore, subject to change.
 
Beginning
in late 2007 and continuing into 2008, we conducted a strategic value review
involving, among other things, AMR Eagle, our regional airline, American Beacon
Advisors, our investment advisory subsidiary and AAdvantage, our frequent flyer
program. The purpose of the review was to determine whether there existed the
potential for unlocking additional stockholder value with respect to one or more
of these strategic assets through some type of separation transaction. As a
result of this review, we announced in late 2007 that we planned to divest AMR
Eagle; however, in mid-2008 we announced that, given the then-current industry
environment, we had decided to place that planned divestiture on hold until
industry conditions are more favorable and stable. Also pursuant to the review,
we sold American Beacon Advisors to a third party in September 2008 (the Company
maintained a minority equity stake).

In the
future, we may consider and engage in discussions with third parties regarding
the divestiture of AMR Eagle and other separation transactions, and we may
decide to proceed with one or more such transactions. There can be no assurance
that we will complete any separation transactions, that any announced plans or
transactions will be consummated, or as to the impact of these transactions on
stockholder value or on us.

Our business is subject to extensive
government regulation, which can result in increases in our costs, disruptions
to our operations, limits on our operating flexibility, reductions in the demand
for air travel, and competitive disadvantages.
     
Airlines
are subject to extensive domestic and international regulatory requirements.
Many of these requirements result in significant costs. For example, the FAA
from time to time issues directives and other regulations relating to the
maintenance and operation of aircraft. Compliance with those requirements drives
significant expenditures and has in the past, and may in the future, cause
disruptions to our operations. In addition, the ability of U.S. carriers to
operate international routes is subject to change because the applicable
arrangements between the United States and foreign governments may be amended
from time to time, or because appropriate slots or facilities are not made
available.
     
Moreover,
additional laws, regulations, taxes and airport rates and charges have been
enacted from time to time that have significantly increased the costs of airline
operations, reduced the demand for air travel or restricted the way we can
conduct our business. For example, the Aviation and Transportation Security Act,
which became law in 2001, mandated the federalization of certain airport
security procedures and resulted in the imposition of additional security
requirements on airlines. In addition, many aspects of our operations are
subject to increasingly stringent environmental regulations, and concerns about
climate change, in particular, may result in the imposition of additional
regulation.  For example, the EU has approved a proposal that will put
a cap on carbon dioxide emissions for all flights into and out of the EU
effective in 2012. Laws or regulations similar to those described above or other
U.S. or foreign governmental actions in the future may adversely affect our
business and financial results.







The
results of our operations, demand for air travel, and the manner in which we
conduct our business each may be affected by changes in law and future actions
taken by governmental agencies, including:




 
      

•

 
      

changes
      in law which affect the services that can be offered by airlines in
      particular markets and at particular airports;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

the
      granting and timing of certain governmental approvals (including foreign
      government approvals) needed for codesharing alliances and other
      arrangements with other airlines;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

restrictions
      on competitive practices (for example court orders, or agency regulations
      or orders, that would curtail an airline’s ability to respond to a
      competitor);



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

the
      adoption of regulations that impact customer service standards (for
      example new passenger security standards, passenger bill of
      rights);



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

restrictions
      on airport operations, such as restrictions on the use of takeoff and
      landing slots at airports or the auction of slot rights currently or
      previously held by us; or



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

the
      adoption of more restrictive locally imposed noise
      restrictions.





In
addition, the air traffic control (ATC) system, which is operated by the
FAA, is not successfully managing the growing demand for U.S. air
travel.  U.S. airlines carry about 740 million passengers a year and
are forecasted to accommodate a billion passengers annually by
2015.  Air-traffic controllers rely on outdated technologies that
routinely overwhelm the system and compel airlines to fly inefficient, indirect
routes.  We support a common-sense approach to ATC modernization that
would allocate cost to all ATC system users in proportion to the services they
consume. The reauthorization by the U.S. Congress of legislation that funds the
FAA, which includes proposals regarding upgrades to the ATC system, is pending,
but it is uncertain when any such legislation will be enacted.

We could be adversely affected by
conflicts overseas or terrorist attacks.
     
Actual or
threatened U.S. military involvement in overseas operations has, on occasion,
had an adverse impact on our business, financial position (including access to
capital markets) and results of operations, and on the airline industry in
general. The continuing conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, or other conflicts or
events in the Middle East or elsewhere, may result in similar adverse
impacts.
     
The
Terrorist Attacks had a material adverse impact on us. The occurrence of another
terrorist attack (whether domestic or international and whether against us or
another entity) could again have a material adverse impact on us.

Our international operations could be
adversely affected by numerous events, circumstances or government actions
beyond our control.
     
Our
current international activities and prospects could be adversely affected by
factors such as reversals or delays in the opening of foreign markets, exchange
controls, currency and political risks, environmental regulation, taxation and
changes in international government regulation of our operations, including the
inability to obtain or retain needed route authorities and/or
slots.
     
For
example, the “open skies” air services agreement between the United States and
the EU which took effect in March 2008, provides airlines from the United
States and EU member states open access to each other’s markets, with freedom of
pricing and unlimited rights to fly beyond the United States and any airport in
the EU including London’s Heathrow Airport. The agreement has resulted in
American facing increased competition in these markets, including Heathrow,
where we have lost market share.

We could be adversely affected by an
outbreak of a disease that affects travel behavior.
     
In 2003,
there was an outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), which had an
adverse impact primarily on our Asia operations. More recently, there have been
concerns about a potential outbreak of avian flu. If there were another outbreak
of a disease (such as SARS or avian flu) that affects travel behavior, it could
have a material adverse impact on us.

 

 






 



Our labor costs are higher than those
of our competitors.
     
Wages,
salaries and benefits constitute a significant percentage of our total operating
expenses. In 2008, they constituted approximately 26 percent of our total
operating expenses. All of the major hub-and-spoke carriers with whom American
competes have achieved significant labor cost savings through or outside of
bankruptcy proceedings. We believe American’s labor costs are higher than those
of its primary competitors, and it is unclear how long this labor cost
disadvantage may persist.

We could be adversely affected if we
are unable to have satisfactory relations with any unionized or other employee
work group.
     
Our
operations could be adversely affected if we fail to have satisfactory relations
with any labor union representing our employees. In addition, any significant
dispute we have with, or any disruption by, an employee work group could
adversely impact us. Moreover, one of the fundamental tenets of our strategic
Turnaround Plan is increased union and employee involvement in our operations.
To the extent that we are unable to have satisfactory relations with any
unionized or other employee work group, our ability to execute our strategic
plans could be adversely affected.

American
is currently in mediated negotiations with each of its three major unions
regarding amendments to their respective labor agreements.  American
Eagle is also in mediated negotiations with the TWU.  The negotiations
process in the airline industry typically is slow and sometimes
contentious.  The union that represents American’s pilots has recently
filed a number of grievances, lawsuits and complaints, most of which American
believes are part of a corporate campaign related to the union’s labor agreement
negotiations with American.  While American is vigorously defending
these claims, unfavorable outcomes of one or more of them could require American
to incur additional costs, change the way it conducts some parts of its
business, or otherwise adversely affect us.

Our insurance costs have increased
substantially and further increases in insurance costs or reductions in coverage
could have an adverse impact on us.
     
We carry
insurance for public liability, passenger liability, property damage and
all-risk coverage for damage to our aircraft. As a result of the Terrorist
Attacks, aviation insurers significantly reduced the amount of insurance
coverage available to commercial air carriers for liability to persons other
than employees or passengers for claims resulting from acts of terrorism, war or
similar events (war-risk coverage). At the same time, these insurers
significantly increased the premiums for aviation insurance in
general.
     
The U.S.
government has agreed to provide commercial war-risk insurance for U.S. based
airlines through March 31, 2009, covering losses to employees, passengers,
third parties and aircraft. Beyond that date, the Secretary of Transportation
has the authority to provide commercial war-risk insurance until May 31,
2009.  If the U.S. government does not extend the policy beyond March
31, 2009 (or beyond May 31, 2009 if the Secretary has exercised the authority to
extend coverage to that date), or if the U.S. government at any time thereafter
ceases to provide such insurance, or reduces the coverage provided by such
insurance, we will attempt to purchase similar coverage with narrower scope from
commercial insurers at an additional cost. To the extent this coverage is not
available at commercially reasonable rates, we would be adversely
affected.
     
While the
price of commercial insurance had declined since the period immediately after
the Terrorist Attacks, in the event commercial insurance carriers further reduce
the amount of insurance coverage available to us, or significantly increase its
cost, we would be adversely affected.

We may be unable to retain key
management personnel.
     
Since the
Terrorist Attacks, a number of our key management employees have elected to
retire early or leave for more financially favorable opportunities at other
companies, both within and outside of the airline industry. There can be no
assurance that we will be able to retain our key management employees. Any
inability to retain our key management employees, or attract and retain
additional qualified management employees, could have a negative impact on
us.



 



 






 



We could be adversely affected by a
failure or disruption of our computer, communications or other technology
systems.
    
We are
heavily and increasingly dependent on technology to operate our business. The
computer and communications systems on which we rely could be disrupted due to
various events, some of which are beyond our control, including natural
disasters, power failures, terrorist attacks, equipment failures, software
failures and computer viruses and hackers. We have taken certain steps to help
reduce the risk of some (but not all) of these potential disruptions. There can
be no assurance, however, that the measures we have taken are adequate to
prevent or remedy disruptions or failures of these systems. Any substantial or
repeated failure of these systems could impact our operations and customer
service, result in the loss of important data, loss of revenues, and increased
costs, and generally harm our business.  Moreover, a failure of
certain of our vital systems could limit our ability to operate our flights for
an extended period of time, which would have a material adverse impact on our
operations and our business.

We
are at risk of losses and adverse publicity which might result from an accident
involving any of our aircraft.

If one of
our aircraft were to be involved in an accident, we could be exposed to
significant tort liability.  The insurance we carry to cover damages
arising from any future accidents may be inadequate.  In the event
that our insurance is not adequate, we may be forced to bear substantial losses
from an accident.  In addition, any accident involving an aircraft
operated by us could adversely affect the public’s perception of
us.


 



 






 



ITEM
1B.     UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS

The
Company had no unresolved Securities and Exchange Commission staff comments at
December 31, 2008.


ITEM
2.                 PROPERTIES

Flight
Equipment  –  Operating

Owned and
leased aircraft operated by the Company at December 31, 2008
included:






 
 
Equipment
      Type

 



Average
      Seating Capacity

 
 



 
Owned

 
 



Capital
      Leased

 
 



Operating
      Leased

 
 



 
Total

 
 

Average
Age
      (Years)

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airbus
      A300-600R

 
 
267
 
 
 
10
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
16
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
19
 



Boeing
      737-800

 
 
148
 
 
 
62
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
77
 
 
 
9
 



Boeing
      757-200

 
 
188
 
 
 
92
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
31
 
 
 
124
 
 
 
14
 



Boeing
      767-200 Extended Range

 
 
167
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
11
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
22
 



Boeing
      767-300 Extended Range

 
 
225
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
11
 
 
 
58
 
 
 
15
 



Boeing
      777-200 Extended Range

 
 
247
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
8
 



McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80

 
 
140
 
 
 
108
 
 
 
64
 
 
 
107
 
 
 
279
 
 
 
19
 



Total

 
 
 
 
 
 
369
 
 
 
76
 
 
 
181
 
 
 
626
 
 
 
15
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



AMR
      Eagle Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Bombardier
      CRJ-700

 
 
70
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
6
 



Embraer
      135

 
 
37
 
 
 
33
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
33
 
 
 
9
 



Embraer
      140

 
 
44
 
 
 
59
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
59
 
 
 
6
 



Embraer
      145

 
 
50
 
 
 
110
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
110
 
 
 
6
 



Super
      ATR

 
 
64/66
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
14
 



Total

 
 
 
 
 
 
227
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
266
 
 
 
8
 





A very
large majority of the Company’s owned aircraft are encumbered by liens granted
in connection with financing transactions entered into by the
Company.

Of the
operating aircraft listed above, one owned Airbus A300-600R aircraft was in
temporary storage as of December 31, 2008.

In
January 2009, the Company permanently retired seven McDonnell Douglas MD-80
aircraft and one Airbus A300 aircraft.



 



 






 



Flight
Equipment  –  Non-Operating

Owned and
leased aircraft not operated by the Company at December 31, 2008
included:






 
Equipment
      Type

 



Owned

 
 

Capital
      Leased

 
 

Operating
      Leased

 
 



Total

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airbus
      A300-600R

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
5
 



Fokker
      100

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
4
 
 
 
4
 



McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80

 
 
18
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
38
 



Total

 
 
18
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
47
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



AMR
      Eagle Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Embraer
      135

 
 
6
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
6
 



Embraer
      145

 
 
8
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
8
 



Saab
      340B

 
 
46
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
46
 



Total

 
 
60
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
60
 





AMR Eagle
has leased its eight owned Embraer 145 aircraft not operated by the Company to
Trans States Airlines, Inc.

For
information concerning the estimated useful lives and residual values for owned
aircraft, lease terms for leased aircraft and amortization relating to aircraft
under capital leases, see Notes 1 and 5 to the consolidated financial
statements.

Flight
Equipment  –  Leased

Lease
expirations for the aircraft included in the table of capital and operating
leased flight equipment operated by the Company as of December 31, 2008
are:






 
 
Equipment
      Type

 



 
2009

 
 



 
2010

 
 



 
2011

 
 



 
2012

 
 



 
2013

 
 

2014
and
      Thereafter

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airbus
      A300-600R

 
 
2
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
8
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Boeing
      737-800

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
8
 
 
 
7
 



Boeing
      757-200

 
 
1
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
30
 



Boeing
      767-200 Extended Range

 
 
1
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
-
 



Boeing
      767-300 Extended Range

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
8
 



McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80

 
 
-
 
 
 
8
 
 
 
21
 
 
 
23
 
 
 
27
 
 
 
92
 


 
      
 
 
4
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
44
 
 
 
137
 



AMR
      Eagle Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Super
      ATR

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
12
 
 
 
26
 


 
      
 
 
4
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
56
 
 
 
163
 





American
leases all 39 Super ATR aircraft from a third party and in turn, subleases those
aircraft to AMR Eagle for operation.

Substantially
all of the Company’s aircraft leases include an option to purchase the aircraft
or to extend the lease term, or both, with the purchase price or renewal rental
to be based essentially on the market value of the aircraft at the end of the
term of the lease or at a predetermined fixed amount.
 
















 

Ground
Properties

The
Company leases or has built as leasehold improvements on leased property: most
of its airport and terminal facilities; its training facilities in Fort Worth,
Texas; its principal overhaul and maintenance bases at Tulsa International
Airport (Tulsa, Oklahoma), Kansas City International Airport (Kansas City,
Missouri) and Alliance Airport (Fort Worth, Texas); its regional reservation
offices; and local ticket and administration offices throughout the
system.  The Company owns its headquarters building in Fort Worth,
Texas, on which a mortgage loan is payable.  American has entered into
agreements with the Tulsa Municipal Airport Trust; the Alliance Airport
Authority, Fort Worth, Texas; the New York City Industrial Development Agency;
and the Dallas/Fort Worth, Chicago O'Hare, Newark, San Juan, and Los Angeles
airport authorities to provide funds for constructing, improving and modifying
facilities and acquiring equipment which are or will be leased to the
Company.  The Company also uses public airports for its flight
operations under lease or use arrangements with the municipalities or
governmental agencies owning or controlling them and leases certain other ground
equipment for use at its facilities.

For
information concerning the estimated lives and residual values for owned ground
properties, lease terms and amortization relating to ground properties under
capital leases, and acquisitions of ground properties, see Notes 1 and 5 to the
consolidated financial statements.


 



 






 



ITEM
3.                 LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS

Between
April 3, 2003 and June 5, 2003, three lawsuits were filed by travel agents, some
of whom opted out of a prior class action (now dismissed) to pursue their claims
individually against American, other airline defendants, and in one case,
against certain airline defendants and Orbitz LLC.  The cases, Tam Travel et. al., v. Delta
Air Lines et. al., in the United States District Court for the Northern
District of California, San Francisco (51 individual agencies), Paula Fausky d/b/a Timeless
Travel v. American Airlines, et. al, in the United States District Court
for the Northern District of Ohio, Eastern Division (29 agencies) and Swope Travel et al. v.
Orbitz et. al. in the United States District Court for the Eastern
District of Texas, Beaumont Division (71 agencies) were consolidated for
pre-trial purposes in the United States District Court for the Northern District
of Ohio, Eastern Division.  Collectively, these lawsuits seek damages and
injunctive relief alleging that the certain airline defendants and Orbitz LLC:
(i) conspired to prevent travel agents from acting as effective competitors in
the distribution of airline tickets to passengers in violation of Section 1 of
the Sherman Act;  (ii) conspired to monopolize the distribution of common
carrier air travel between airports in the United States in violation of Section
2 of the Sherman Act; and that (iii) between 1995 and the present, the airline
defendants conspired to reduce commissions paid to U.S.-based travel agents in
violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act.  On September 23, 2005, the
Fausky
plaintiffs dismissed their claims with prejudice.  On September 14, 2006,
the court dismissed with prejudice 28 of the Swope
plaintiffs.  On October 29, 2007, the court dismissed all
actions.  The Tam plaintiffs have
appealed the court’s decision.  The Swope plaintiffs have
moved to have their case remanded to the Eastern District of Texas.
 American continues to vigorously defend these lawsuits.  A final
adverse court decision awarding substantial money damages or placing material
restrictions on the Company’s distribution practices would have a material
adverse impact on the Company.

On July
12, 2004, a consolidated class action complaint that was subsequently amended on
November 30, 2004, was filed against American and the Association of
Professional Flight Attendants (APFA), the union which represents American’s
flight attendants (Ann
M. Marcoux, et al., v. American Airlines Inc., et al. in the United
States District Court for the Eastern District of New York). While a class has
not yet been certified, the lawsuit seeks on behalf of all of American’s flight
attendants or various subclasses to set aside and to obtain damages allegedly
resulting from the April 2003 Collective Bargaining Agreement referred to as the
Restructuring Participation Agreement (RPA). The RPA was one of three labor
agreements American successfully reached with its unions in order to avoid
filing for bankruptcy in 2003.  In a related case (Sherry Cooper, et al. v.
TWA Airlines, LLC, et al., also in the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of New York), the court denied a preliminary injunction
against implementation of the RPA on June 30, 2003. The Marcoux suit alleges
various claims against the APFA and American relating to the RPA and the
ratification vote on the RPA by individual APFA members, including: violation of
the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) and the APFA’s
Constitution and By-laws, violation by the APFA of its duty of fair
representation to its members, violation by American of provisions of the
Railway Labor Act (RLA) through improper coercion of flight attendants into
voting or changing their vote for ratification, and violations of the Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act of 1970 (RICO). On
March 28, 2006, the district court dismissed all of various state law claims
against American, all but one of the LMRDA claims against the APFA, and the
claimed violations of RICO.  On July 22, 2008, the district court
granted summary judgment to American and APFA concerning the remaining claimed
violations of the RLA and the duty of fair representation against American and
the APFA (as well as one LMRDA claim and one claim against the APFA of a breach
of its constitution).  On August 20, 2008, a notice of appeal was
filed on behalf of the purported class of flight attendants. Although the
Company believes the case against it is without merit and both American and the
APFA are vigorously defending the lawsuit, a final adverse court decision
invalidating the RPA and awarding substantial money damages would have a
material adverse impact on the Company.



 



 






 



On
February 14, 2006, the Antitrust Division of the United States Department of
Justice (the “DOJ”) served the Company with a grand jury subpoena as part of an
ongoing investigation into possible criminal violations of the antitrust laws by
certain domestic and foreign air cargo carriers. At this time, the Company does
not believe it is a target of the DOJ investigation.  The New Zealand
Commerce Commission notified the Company on February 17, 2006 that it is also
investigating whether the Company and certain other cargo carriers entered into
agreements relating to fuel surcharges, security surcharges, war risk
surcharges, and customs clearance surcharges.  On February 22, 2006, the
Company received a letter from the Swiss Competition Commission informing the
Company that it too is investigating whether the Company and certain other cargo
carriers entered into agreements relating to fuel surcharges, security
surcharges, war risk surcharges, and customs clearance surcharges.  On
March 11, 2008, the Company received from the Swiss Competition Commission a
request for information concerning, among other things, the scope and
organization of the Company’s activities in Switzerland.  On December
19, 2006 and June 12, 2007, the Company received requests for information from
the European Commission seeking information regarding the Company's corporate
structure, and revenue and pricing announcements for air cargo shipments to and
from the European Union. On January 23, 2007, the Brazilian competition
authorities, as part of an ongoing investigation, conducted an unannounced
search of the Company’s cargo facilities in Sao Paulo, Brazil.  On
April 28, 2008, the Brazilian competition authorities preliminarily charged the
Company with violating Brazilian competition laws.  The authorities
are investigating whether the Company and certain other foreign and domestic air
carriers violated Brazilian competition laws by illegally conspiring to set fuel
surcharges on cargo shipments.  The Company is vigorously contesting
the allegations and the preliminary findings of the Brazilian competition
authorities.  On June 27, 2007 and October 31, 2007, the Company
received requests for information from the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission seeking information regarding fuel surcharges imposed by the Company
on cargo shipments to and from Australia and regarding the structure of the
Company's cargo operations. On September 1, 2008, the Company received a request
from the Korea Fair Trade Commission seeking information regarding cargo rates
and surcharges and the structure of the Company’s activities in Korea. On December 18, 2007, the
European Commission issued a Statement of Objection (“SO”) against 26 airlines,
including the Company.  The SO alleges that these carriers
participated in a conspiracy to set surcharges on cargo shipments in violation
of EU law.  The SO states that, in the event that the allegations in
the SO are affirmed, the Commission will impose fines against the
Company.  The Company intends to vigorously contest the allegations
and findings in the SO under EU laws, and it intends to cooperate fully with all
other pending investigations. In the event that the SO is affirmed or other
investigations uncover violations of the U.S. antitrust laws or the competition
laws of some other jurisdiction, or if the Company were named and found liable
in any litigation based on these allegations, such findings and related legal
proceedings could have a material adverse impact on the
Company.  

Approximately
44 purported class action lawsuits have been filed in the U.S. against the
Company and certain foreign and domestic air carriers alleging that the
defendants violated U.S. antitrust laws by illegally conspiring to set prices
and surcharges on cargo shipments.  These cases, along with other
purported class action lawsuits in which the Company was not named, were
consolidated in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New
York as In re Air
Cargo Shipping Services Antitrust Litigation, 06-MD-1775 on June 20,
2006.  Plaintiffs are
seeking trebled money damages and injunctive relief.  The Company has
not been named as a defendant in the consolidated complaint filed by the
plaintiffs.  However, the plaintiffs have not released any claims that
they may have against the Company, and the Company may later be added as a
defendant in the litigation.  If the Company is sued on these claims,
it will vigorously defend the suit, but any adverse judgment could have a
material adverse impact on the Company.  Also, on January 23, 2007,
the Company was served with a purported class action complaint filed against the
Company, American, and certain foreign and domestic air carriers in the Supreme
Court of British Columbia in Canada (McKay v. Ace Aviation
Holdings, et al.). The plaintiff alleges that the defendants violated
Canadian competition laws by illegally conspiring to set prices and surcharges
on cargo shipments.  The complaint seeks compensatory and punitive damages
under Canadian law.  On June 22, 2007, the plaintiffs agreed to dismiss
their claims against the Company.  The dismissal is without prejudice
and the Company could be brought back into the litigation at a future
date.  If litigation is recommenced against the Company in the
Canadian courts, the Company will vigorously defend itself; however, any adverse
judgment could have a material adverse impact on the Company.

On June
20, 2006, the DOJ served the Company with a grand jury subpoena as part of an
ongoing investigation into possible criminal violations of the antitrust laws by
certain domestic and foreign passenger carriers.  At this time, the
Company does not believe it is a target of the DOJ investigation.  The
Company intends to cooperate fully with this investigation.  On
September 4, 2007, the Attorney General of the State of Florida served the
Company with a Civil Investigative Demand as part of its investigation of
possible violations of federal and Florida antitrust laws regarding the pricing
of air passenger transportation.  In the event that this or other
investigations uncover violations of the U.S. antitrust laws or the competition
laws of some other jurisdiction, such findings and related legal proceedings
could have a material adverse impact on the Company.







Approximately
52 purported class action lawsuits have been filed in the U.S. against the
Company and certain foreign and domestic air carriers alleging that the
defendants violated U.S. antitrust laws by illegally conspiring to set prices
and surcharges for passenger transportation.  On October 25, 2006,
these cases, along with other purported class action lawsuits in which the
Company was not named, were consolidated in the United States District Court for
the Northern District of California as In re International Air
Transportation Surcharge Antitrust Litigation, Civ. No. 06-1793 (the
“Passenger MDL”).  On July 9, 2007, the Company was named as a
defendant in the Passenger MDL.  On August 25, 2008, the plaintiffs
dismissed their claims against the Company in this action.  On March
13, 2008, and March 14, 2008, two additional purported class action complaints,
Turner v. American Airlines, et al., Civ. No. 08-1444 (N.D. Cal.), and LaFlamme
v. American Airlines, et al., Civ. No. 08-1079 (E.D.N.Y.), were filed against
the Company, alleging that the Company violated U.S. antitrust laws by illegally
conspiring to set prices and surcharges for passenger transportation in Japan
and certain European countries, respectively.  The Turner plaintiffs
have failed to perfect service against the Company, and it is unclear whether
they intend to pursue their claims.  On February 17, 2009, the LaFlamme
plaintiffs agreed to dismiss their claims against the Company without
prejudice.  In the event that the Turner plaintiffs pursue their claims or
the LaFlamme plaintiffs re-file claims against the Company, the Company will
vigorously defend these lawsuits, but any adverse judgment in these actions
could have a material adverse impact on the Company.

On August
21, 2006, a patent infringement lawsuit was filed against American and American
Beacon Advisors, Inc. (then a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company) in the
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas (Ronald A. Katz Technology
Licensing, L.P. v. American Airlines, Inc., et al.).  This case
has been consolidated in the Central District of California for pre-trial
purposes with numerous other cases brought by the plaintiff against other
defendants.  On December 1, 2008, the court dismissed with prejudice
all claims against American Beacon.  The plaintiff alleges that
American infringes a number of the plaintiff’s patents, each of which relates to
automated telephone call processing systems.  The plaintiff is seeking
past and future royalties, injunctive relief, costs and attorneys'
fees.  Although the Company believes that the plaintiff’s claims are
without merit and is vigorously defending the lawsuit, a final adverse court
decision awarding substantial money damages or placing material restrictions on
existing automated telephone call system operations would have a material
adverse impact on the Company.
 

















ITEM
4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS

No
matters were submitted to a vote of the Company's security holders during the
last quarter of its fiscal year ended December 31, 2008.

Executive Officers of the
Registrant

The
following information relates to the executive officers of AMR as of the filing
of this Form 10-K.




 
      
 
      
 
      



Gerard
      J. Arpey

 
      

Mr.
      Arpey was elected Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of AMR
      and American in May 2004.  He was elected Chief Executive
      Officer of AMR and American in April 2003.  He served as
      President and Chief Operating Officer of AMR and American from April 2002
      to April 2003. He served as Executive Vice President – Operations of
      American from January 2000 to April 2002, Chief Financial Officer of AMR
      from 1995 through 2000 and Senior Vice President – Planning of American
      from 1992 to January 1995.  Prior to that, he served in various
      management positions at American since 1982.  Age
      50.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Daniel
      P. Garton

 
      

Mr.
      Garton was elected Executive Vice President – Marketing of American in
      September 2002.  He is also an Executive Vice President of
      AMR.  He served as Executive Vice President – Customer Services
      of American from January 2000 to September 2002 and Senior Vice President
      – Customer Services of American from 1998 to January
      2000.  Prior to that, he served as President of AMR Eagle from
      1995 to 1998.  Except for two years service as Senior Vice
      President and Chief Financial Officer of Continental between 1993 and
      1995, he has been with the Company in various management positions since
      1984.  Age 51.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Thomas
      W. Horton

 
      

Mr.
      Horton was elected Executive Vice President of Finance and Planning and
      Chief Financial Officer of AMR and American in March 2006 upon returning
      to American from AT&T Corp., a telecommunications company, where he
      had been Vice Chairman and Chief Financial Officer.  Prior to
      leaving for AT&T Corp., Mr. Horton was Senior Vice President and Chief
      Financial Officer of AMR and American from January 2000 to
      2002.  From 1994 to January 2000 Mr. Horton served as a Vice
      President of American and has served in various management positions of
      American since 1985. Age 47.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Robert
      W. Reding

 
      

Mr.
      Reding was elected Executive Vice President – Operations for American in
      September 2007.  He is also an Executive Vice President of
      AMR.  He served as Senior Vice President – Technical Operations
      for American from May 2003 to September 2007.  He joined the
      Company in March 2000 and served as Chief Operations Officer of AMR Eagle
      through May 2003.  Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Reding
      served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Reno Air from 1992 to
      1998 and President and Chief Executive Officer of Canadian Regional
      Airlines from 1998 to March 2000.  Age 59.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Gary
      F. Kennedy

 
      

Mr.
      Kennedy was elected Senior Vice President and General Counsel of AMR and
      American in January 2003.  He is also the Company’s Chief
      Compliance Officer. He served as Vice President – Corporate Real Estate of
      American from 1996 to January 2003.  Prior to that, he served as
      an attorney and in various management positions at American since
      1984.  Age 53.



 
      
 
      
 
      




There are
no family relationships among the executive officers of the Company named
above.

There
have been no events under any bankruptcy act, no criminal proceedings, and no
judgments or injunctions material to the evaluation of the ability and integrity
of any director or executive officer during the past five
years.


 



 






 








PART
      II





ITEM
5.                 MARKET
FOR REGISTRANT'S COMMON STOCK AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS

The
Company's common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange (symbol
AMR).  The approximate number of record holders of the Company's
common stock at February 11, 2009 was 15,802.

The range
of closing market prices for AMR's common stock on the New York Stock Exchange
was:





 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 

High

 
 

Low

 
 

High

 
 

Low

 



Quarter
      Ended

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



March
      31

 
$
16.18
 
 
$
8.38
 
 
$
40.66
 
 
$
30.14
 



June
      30

 
 
10.32
 
 
 
5.12
 
 
 
33.12
 
 
 
25.34
 



September
      30

 
 
13.00
 
 
 
4.41
 
 
 
28.83
 
 
 
20.77
 



December
      31

 
 
11.97
 
 
 
6.45
 
 
 
25.64
 
 
 
14.03
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




No cash
dividends on common stock were declared for any period during 2008 or 2007, and
the Company has no intention of paying dividends in the foreseeable
future.







 



 






 



ITEM
6.                 SELECTED
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA




 
(in
      millions, except per share amounts)









 
      
 
 
2008 2,5
 
 
 
2007 4
 
 
 
2006
      1
 
 
 
2005
      1,
    6
 
 
 
2004
      1,
    6
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      operating revenues

 
$
23,766
 
 
$
22,935
 
 
$
22,563
 
 
$
20,712
 
 
$
18,645
 



Operating
      income (loss)

 
 
(1,889
)
 
 
965
 
 
 
1,060
 
 
 
(89
)
 
 
(134
)



Net
      income (loss)

 
 
(2,071
)
 
 
504
 
 
 
231
 
 
 
(857
)
 
 
(751
)



Net
      income (loss) per share:
Basic

 
 
(7.98
)
 
 
2.06
 
 
 
1.13
 
 
 
(5.18
)
 
 
(4.68
)



      Diluted

 
 
(7.98
)
 
 
1.78
 
 
 
0.98
 
 
 
(5.18
)
 
 
(4.68
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      assets

 
 
25,175
 
 
 
28,571
 
 
 
29,145
 
 
 
29,495
 
 
 
28,773
 



Long-term
      debt, less current maturities

 
 
 8,419
 
 
 
9,413
 
 
 
11,217
 
 
 
12,530
 
 
 
12,436
 



Obligations
      under capital leases, less current obligations

 
 
  582
 
 
 
  680
 
 
 
  824
 
 
 
  926
 
 
 
  1,088
 



Obligation
      for pension and postretirement benefits

 
 
6,614
 
 
 
3,620
 
 
 
5,341
 
 
 
4,998
 
 
 
4,743
 



Stockholders’
      equity (deficit) 3

 
 
(2,935
)
 
 
2,657
 
 
 
(606
)
 
 
(1,430
)
 
 
(537
)









1  


Includes
      the impact of adopting FSP AUG AIR-1 “Accounting for Planned Major
      Maintenance Activities”.








2  


Includes
      restructuring charges.  In 2008, these restructuring charges
      consisted of $1.2 billion primarily related to aircraft and employee
      charges due to announced capacity reductions (for further discussion of
      these items, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial
      statements).








3  


Effective
      December 31, 2006, the Company adopted SFAS 158 “Employers’ Accounting for
      Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans”.  This
      adoption decreased Stockholders’ equity by $1.0 billion and increased the
      obligation for pension and other postretirement benefits by $880
      million.  As a result of actuarial changes including the
      discount rate and the impact of legislation changing pilot retirement age
      to 65, the Company recorded a $1.7 billion reduction in pension and
      retiree medical and other benefits and a corresponding increase in
      stockholders’ equity in 2007.  As a result of a significant
      decline in market value in 2008, the Company recorded a $3.0 billion
      increase in pension and retiree medical and other benefits and a similar
      decrease in stockholders’ equity in 2008.  In 2008, the Company
      incurred $103 million in expense due to a pension settlement (for further
      discussion, see Note 10 to the consolidated financial
      statements).








4  


Includes
      the impact of the $138 million gain on the sale of ARINC as described in
      Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements.








5  


Includes
      the impact of the $432 million gain on the sale of American Beacon
      Advisors as described in Note 14 to the consolidated financial
      statements.








6  


Includes
      the impact of adopting Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
      123(R), “Share-Based Payment”.





No cash
dividends were declared on AMR’s common shares during any of the periods
above.

Information
on the comparability of results is included in Item 7, “Management's Discussion
and Analysis” and the notes to the consolidated financial
statements.


 



 






 



ITEM
7.                 MANAGEMENT'S
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

Forward-Looking
Information

The
discussions under Business, Risk Factors, Properties and Legal Proceedings, and
the following discussions under “Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Quantitative and Qualitative
Disclosures about Market Risk” contain various forward-looking statements within
the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which represent
the Company's expectations or beliefs concerning future events.  When
used in this document and in documents incorporated herein by reference, the
words "expects," "plans," "anticipates," “indicates,” “believes,” “forecast,”
“guidance,” “outlook,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “targets” and similar
expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking
statements include, without limitation, the Company’s expectations concerning
operations and financial conditions, including changes in capacity, revenues,
and costs, future financing plans and needs, overall economic and industry
conditions, plans and objectives for future operations, regulatory approvals and
actions, including the Company’s application for antitrust immunity with other
oneworld alliance
members, and the impact on the Company of its results of operations in recent
years and the sufficiency of its financial resources to absorb that
impact.  Other forward-looking statements include statements which do
not relate solely to historical facts, such as, without limitation, statements
which discuss the possible future effects of current known trends or
uncertainties, or which indicate that the future effects of known trends or
uncertainties cannot be predicted, guaranteed or assured.  All
forward-looking statements in this report are based upon information available
to the Company on the date of this report.  The Company undertakes no
obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether
as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.  Guidance
given in this report regarding capacity, fuel consumption, fuel prices, fuel
hedging, and unit costs, and statements regarding expectations of regulatory
approval of the Company’s application for antitrust immunity with other oneworld members are
forward-looking statements.  The Risk Factors listed in Item 1A, in
addition to other possible factors not listed, could cause the Company's actual
results to differ materially from historical results and from those expressed in
forward-looking statements.

Overview

After
earning a modest profit in 2006 and 2007, in 2008 the Company was severely
challenged by the difficulties of very high fuel prices (oil prices reached a
record price of $147 per barrel in July 2008) and a rapidly deteriorating
economy in the second half of the year. In reaction to these challenges,
throughout 2008 the Company implemented several key actions designed to help it
manage through these near-term challenges while continuing to position the
Company for long-term success.

In
response to soaring jet fuel prices, in May 2008 the Company announced capacity
cuts to take effect during the last four months of 2008 as it attempted to
create a more sustainable supply-demand balance in the market.  At the
same time, in an effort to generate more revenue, the Company introduced a range
of new service charges, such as a service charge for a first checked bag, that
were expected to generate incremental annual revenue of several hundred million
dollars.

The
Company also continued to focus on strengthening its balance sheet and executing
on its fleet renewal and replacement plan, as further described below, and
implemented a number of initiatives to improve its dependability and on-time
performance.  In addition, the Company continues to look for ways to
strengthen its global network, and in August 2008 the Company, along with four
fellow members of the oneworld global alliance,
filed an application with the U.S. Department of Transportation for global
antitrust immunity.



 



 






 



The
Company recorded a net loss of $2.1 billion in 2008 compared to net earnings of
$504 million in 2007.  The Company’s 2008 results include an
impairment charge of $1.1 billion to write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and
Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related long-lived assets down to their
estimated fair values, a $71 million accrual for employee severance costs, and a
$33 million expense related to the grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft
prior to lease expiration (all in connection with announced capacity
reductions).  Early pilot retirements resulted in $917 million in
total lump sum payments to 517 pilot retirees (approximately $1.8 million per
retiree consisting of payments from Company-funded defined benefit and defined
contribution plan trusts) for which the Company incurred a $103 million
settlement charge.  The capacity reduction and impairment charges are
described in Note 2 and the pension settlement charge is described in Note 10 to
the consolidated financial statements.  In addition, the Company’s
2008 results include the sale of American Beacon for a net gain of $432 million
described in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements.

The
Company’s 2008 net operating loss also reflects a dramatic year-over-year
increase in fuel prices from an average of $2.13 per gallon in 2007 to an
average of $3.03 per gallon in 2008.  Fuel expense has become the
Company’s largest single expense category and the price increase resulted in
$2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel expense in 2008 (based on the
year-over-year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied by gallons
consumed, inclusive of the impact of fuel hedging).  Although fuel
prices have abated somewhat from the record prices recorded in July 2008, fuel
prices are still extremely volatile by historical standards.

The
significant rise in fuel price was partially offset by higher unit revenues
(passenger revenue per available seat mile).  Mainline passenger unit
revenues increased 7.3 percent for the year due to an 8.6 percent increase in
passenger yield (passenger revenue per passenger mile) partially offset by an
approximately one point load factor decrease compared to
2007.  Although passenger yield showed year-over-year improvement,
passenger yield remains essentially flat with the levels set in 2000 despite
cumulative inflation of approximately 25 percent over the same time
frame.  The Company believes this is the result of a fragmented
industry with numerous competitors and excess capacity, increased low cost
carrier competition, increased price competition due to the internet, and other
factors.  Since deregulation in 1978, the Company’s passenger yield
has increased 85 percent, while the Consumer Price Index (CPI), as measured by
the US Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics, has grown by 226
percent.  The Company believes increases in passenger yield will
continue to significantly lag CPI indefinitely.

The
Company’s efforts to drive continuous revenue and cost improvement under the
Turnaround Plan are ongoing.  This plan was established in 2003 and is
the Company’s strategic framework for achieving sustained profitability and has
four tenets: (i) lower costs to compete, (ii) fly smart – give customers what
they value, (iii) pull together, win together and (iv) build a financial
foundation.

Although
the Company’s cost per available seat mile increased from 11.54 cents in 2002 to
14.57 cents in 2008, the fuel component of unit cost increased from 1.43 cents
to 5.12 cents over the same period.  All other components of unit cost
decreased from 10.11 cents in 2002 to 9.45 cents in 2008, or 6.5 percent.
However, the Company’s 2008 unit costs excluding fuel were greater than in 2007,
and are expected to increase in 2009 compared to 2008.  Factors
driving the 2009 increase include increased defined benefit pension expenses and
retiree medical and other expenses (due to the stock market decline), and cost
pressures associated with the Company’s previously announced capacity reductions
and dependability initiatives.

The
Company has also implemented numerous efforts to find additional revenue sources
and increase existing ones.  In addition to improving core passenger
and cargo revenues, these efforts have contributed to an increase in Other
revenue from $1.4 billion (as reclassified by change in presentation for certain
passenger revenues – see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements) in
2002 to $2.2 billion in 2008.  Examples of new revenue sources over
this period include checked baggage service charges, flight change service
charges, onboard food sales, single day passes for AAdmirals Club admission,
reservations ticketing service charges, First Class upgrades on day of
departure, and numerous other initiatives.



 



 






 



Lastly,
under the Turnaround Plan, the Company has worked to reduce debt, continued to
make contributions to employee pension plans and improve financial flexibility
for the future.  Historically, airline industry earnings are highly
cyclical with frequent and extended periods of significant losses, and an
airline’s liquidity and borrowing capacity can be critical to sustaining
operations.  The Company has reduced its balance sheet debt
(Short-Term Debt plus Long-Term Debt) from $13.2 billion at the end of 2002 to
$11.0 billion at year end 2008.  Over the same period, Cash and
Short-term investments (including restricted cash and short-term investments)
have increased by $900 million to $3.6 billion.  However, the
Company’s Cash and Short-term investments (including restricted cash and
short-term investments) decreased in 2008 due primarily to debt repayments,
increased fuel expense and fuel hedge collateral as discussed in the “Liquidity
and Capital Resources” section of Item 7.

Although
the ratio of the fair value of plan assets to the accumulated benefit
obligations of the employee pension programs has decreased from 75 percent to 70
percent during this same period due to a significant decrease in the value of
assets from the recent decline in the stock market, the Company has contributed
$2.1 billion to the employee pension plans from 2002 through the end of
2008.

The
Company made several announcements during 2008.  In August 2008,
American entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing
arrangements with UK carrier, British Airways, and Spanish carrier, Iberia,
providing for commercial cooperation by the carriers on flights between North
America (consisting of the United States, Canada and Mexico) and Europe
(consisting of the European Union, Switzerland and Norway).  The
agreement contemplates the pooling and sharing of certain revenues and costs on
transatlantic flights, expanded codesharing on each other’s flights, enhanced
frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in the areas of planning,
marketing and certain operations.  These agreements were signed in
connection with an application to the U.S. Department of Transportation by the
carriers for antitrust immunity to permit global cooperation.  The
application also included the Finnish carrier, Finnair, and the Jordanian
carrier, Royal Jordanian.  If granted (which cannot be assured),
antitrust immunity will permit the five carriers, all of whom are members of the
oneworld airline
alliance, to deepen cooperation on a bilateral and multilateral
basis.

Implementation
of the joint business agreement and related arrangements is subject to
conditions, including various U.S. and foreign regulatory approvals, successful
negotiation of certain detailed financial and commercial arrangements, and other
approvals.  Agencies from which regulatory approvals must be obtained
may impose requirements or limitations as a condition of granting such
approvals, such as requiring divestiture of routes, gates, slots or other
assets.

The
Company also continued its fleet renewal strategy as it entered into various
amendments to its 737-800 purchase agreement with the Boeing
Company.   Giving effect to the amendments and considering the
impact of delays caused by Boeing’s recent machinist strike, the Company is now
committed to take delivery of a total of 29 737-800 aircraft in 2009, 39 737-800
aircraft in 2010 and eight 737-800 aircraft in 2011.  In addition to
these aircraft, the Company has firm commitments for eleven 737-800 aircraft and
seven Boeing 777 aircraft scheduled to be delivered in 2013 - 2016.

In
addition, the Company entered into a new purchase agreement with Boeing for the
acquisition of 42 Boeing 787-9 aircraft.  The Boeing 787-9 purchase
agreement contains certain contingency provisions including provisions which
allow American to cancel the contract under certain circumstances, which are
described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources subsection of Item
7.  “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations”.  The agreement also includes purchase rights
to acquire up to 58 additional Boeing 787 aircraft.

In 2007,
the Company had announced the intended divestiture of AMR Eagle, its
wholly-owned regional carrier.  Given the current industry
environment, the Company announced in 2008 that it had decided to place on hold
its planned divestiture until industry conditions were more stable and
favorable.  The Company continues to believe that a divestiture of AMR
Eagle makes sense in the long term for the Company, American, AMR Eagle and
their stakeholders, but the Company also believes that a divestiture is not
sensible amid current conditions.



 



 






 



The Company’s ability to
return to profitability and its ability to continue to fund its obligations on
an ongoing basis will depend on a number of factors, many of which are largely
beyond the Company’s control.  Certain risk factors that affect
the Company’s business and financial results are discussed in the Risk Factors
listed in Item 1A.  In addition, most of the Company’s largest
domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have filed for bankruptcy in
the last several years and have used this process to significantly reduce
contractual labor and other costs.  In order to remain competitive and
to improve its financial condition, the Company must continue to take steps to
generate additional revenues and to reduce its costs.  Although the
Company has a number of initiatives underway to address its cost and revenue
challenges, the adequacy and ultimate success of these initiatives is not known
at this time and cannot be assured.  It will be very difficult for the
Company to continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis, and to return
to profitability, if the overall industry revenue environment does not improve
substantially and if fuel prices were to increase and persist for an extended
period at high levels.

Liquidity and Capital
Resources

Cash, Short-Term Investments and
Restricted Assets    At December 31, 2008, the
Company had $3.1 billion in unrestricted cash and short-term investments and
$459 million in restricted cash and short-term investments, both at fair value,
versus $4.5 billion in unrestricted cash and short-term investments and $428
million in restricted cash and short-term investments in
2007.  Despite the current credit crisis and its deteriorating impact
on the measurement of the fair value of investments, the Company had no
short-term investments that had permanently declined in value, nor did it own
any auction rate securities.  As of December 31, 2008, the Company had
recorded approximately $10 million of unrealized loss in other comprehensive
income related to its short-term investments.

Significant Indebtedness and Future
Financing   Indebtedness is a significant risk to the
Company as discussed in the Risk Factors listed in Item 1A.  During
2006, 2007 and 2008, the Company raised an aggregate of approximately $2.4
billion in financing to fund capital commitments (mainly for aircraft and ground
properties), debt maturities, and employee pension obligations, and to bolster
its liquidity.  As of the date of this Form 10-K, the Company believes
that it should have sufficient liquidity to fund its operations for the near
term, including repayment of debt and capital leases, capital expenditures and
other contractual obligations, including those relating to the anticipated
delivery of 76 Boeing 737-800 aircraft that American is now committed to acquire
in 2009 through 2011.

In 2009,
the Company will be required to make approximately $1.8 billion of principal
payments on long-term debt and approximately $110 million in principal payments
on capital leases, and the Company expects to spend approximately $1.6 billion
on capital expenditures, including the aircraft commitments described in the
preceding paragraph.  In addition, the global economic downturn,
potential increases in the amount of required reserves under credit card
processing agreements, and the obligation to post cash collateral to secure loss
positions on fuel hedging contracts, also pose challenges to our
liquidity.  To maintain sufficient liquidity and because the Company
has significant debt, lease and other obligations in the next several years,
including commitments to purchase aircraft, as well as significant pension
funding obligations (refer to Contractual Obligations in this Item 7), the
Company will need access to substantial additional funding.

The
Company’s possible financing sources primarily include: (i) a limited amount of
additional secured aircraft debt or sale leaseback transactions involving owned
aircraft; (ii) debt secured by new aircraft deliveries; (iii) debt secured by
other assets; (iv) securitization of future operating receipts; (v) the sale or
monetization of certain assets; (vi) unsecured debt; and (vii) issuance of
equity and/or equity-like securities. Besides unencumbered aircraft, some of the
Company’s particular assets and other sources of liquidity that could be sold or
otherwise used as sources of financing include AAdvantage program miles, route
authorities and takeoff and landing slots, and certain of the Company’s business
units and subsidiaries, such as AMR Eagle.  The Company’s ability to
obtain future financing is limited by the value of its unencumbered
assets.  A very large majority of the Company’s aircraft assets
(including most of the aircraft eligible for the benefits of Section 1110
of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code) are encumbered.  Also, the market value
of these aircraft assets has declined in recent years, and may continue to
decline.  The Company believes it has at least $3.5 billion in
unencumbered assets and other sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2008. However, the
availability and level of the financing sources described above cannot be
assured, particularly in light of the Company’s and American’s financial results
in recent years, the Company’s and American’s substantial indebtedness, the
difficult revenue environment they face, their reduced credit ratings, recent
historically high fuel prices, and the financial difficulties experienced in the
airline industry.  In addition, the global economic downturn and
recent severe disruptions in the capital markets and other sources of funding have resulted in greater
volatility, less liquidity, widening of credit spreads and substantially more
limited availability of funding.  The inability of the Company to
obtain necessary funding on acceptable terms would have a material adverse
impact on the Company and on its ability to sustain its operations.







The
Company’s substantial indebtedness and other obligations have important
consequences.  For example, they: (i) limit the Company’s ability to
obtain additional funding for working capital, capital expenditures,
acquisitions and general corporate purposes, and adversely affect the terms on
which such funding could be obtained; (ii) require the Company to dedicate a
substantial portion of its cash flow from operations to payments on its
indebtedness and other obligations, thereby reducing the funds available for
other purposes; (iii) make the Company more vulnerable to economic downturns;
and (iv) limit the Company’s ability to withstand competitive pressures and
reduce its flexibility in responding to changing business and economic
conditions.

Under the
Company’s Boeing 737-800 and Boeing 777-200 purchase agreements, payments for
the related aircraft purchase commitments will be approximately $1.0 billion in
2009, $1.1 billion in 2010, $355 million in 2011, $218 million in 2012, $417
million in 2013 and $584 million for 2014 and beyond.  These amounts
are net of purchase deposits currently held by the manufacturer.

In
October 2008, the Company entered into a sale leaseback agreement for 20 of the
76 Boeing 737-800 aircraft to be delivered in 2009 - 2011.  Such financing
is subject to certain terms and conditions including a minimum liquidity
requirement.  In addition, the Company had previously arranged for backstop
financing which covered a significant portion of the remaining 2009 - 2011
Boeing 737-800 aircraft deliveries.  As a result, all of the Company’s
737-800 aircraft purchase commitments for 2009 - 2011 will be covered by
committed financing except for approximately $195 million, substantially all of
which is due in the fourth quarter of 2010.

In
October 2008, the Company entered into a new purchase agreement with Boeing for
the acquisition of 42 Boeing 787-9 aircraft.  Per the purchase
agreement, the first such aircraft is scheduled to be delivered in 2012, and the
last is scheduled to be delivered in 2018. The agreement also
includes purchase rights to acquire up to 58 additional Boeing 787 aircraft,
with deliveries between 2015 and 2020.  Based on preliminary
information received from Boeing on the impact of the overall Boeing 787
program delay to
American’s delivery positions due to the strike in 2008, the Company now
believes the first of the initial 42 aircraft will be delivered during the
second half of 2013.  The first of the 58 optional purchase rights
aircraft would be delivered in the second half of 2016 based on the same
preliminary information. Under the 787-9 purchase
agreement, except as described below, American will not be obligated to purchase
a 787-9 aircraft unless it gives Boeing notice confirming its election to do so
at least 18 months prior to the scheduled delivery date for that
aircraft.  If American does not give that notice with respect to an
aircraft, the aircraft will be no longer subject to the 787-9 purchase
agreement.  These confirmation rights may be exercised until May 1,
2013, provided that those rights will terminate earlier if American reaches a
collective bargaining agreement with its pilot union that includes provisions
enabling American to utilize the 787-9 to American’s satisfaction in the
operations desired by American, or if American confirms its election to purchase
any of the initial 42 787-9 aircraft.  While there can be no
assurances, American expects to have reached an agreement as described above
with its pilots union prior to the first notification date.  In either
of those events, American would become obligated to purchase all of the initial
42 aircraft then subject to the purchase agreement.  If neither of
those events occur prior to May 1, 2013, then on that date American may elect to
purchase all of the initial 42 aircraft then subject to the purchase agreement,
and if it does not elect to do so, the purchase agreement will terminate in its
entirety.
  .
The
Company’s continued aircraft replacement strategy, and its execution of that
strategy, will depend on such factors as future economic and industry conditions
and the financial condition of the Company.

Credit
Ratings  AMR’s and American’s credit ratings are significantly
below investment grade.  Additional reductions in AMR's or American's
credit ratings could further increase its borrowing or other costs and further
restrict the availability of future financing.

Credit Facility
Covenants   American has a secured bank credit facility
which consists of a fully drawn $255 million revolving credit facility with a
final maturity on June 17, 2009, and a fully drawn $436 million term loan
facility, with a final maturity on December 17, 2010 (the Revolving Facility and
the Term Loan Facility, respectively, and collectively,
the Credit Facility).   



 



 






 



The
Credit Facility contains a covenant (the Liquidity Covenant) requiring American
to maintain, as defined, unrestricted cash, unencumbered short-term investments
and amounts available for drawing under committed revolving credit facilities of
not less than $1.25 billion for each quarterly period through the life of the
Credit Facility.  AMR and American were in compliance with the
Liquidity Covenant as of December 31, 2008, and expect to be able to continue to
comply with this covenant in the near term.  In addition, the Credit
Facility contains a covenant (the EBITDAR Covenant) requiring AMR to maintain a
ratio of cash flow (defined as consolidated net income, before interest expense
(less capitalized interest), income taxes, depreciation and amortization and
rentals, adjusted for certain gains or losses and non-cash items) to fixed
charges (comprising interest expense (less capitalized interest) and
rentals).  In May 2008, AMR and American entered into an amendment to
the Credit Facility which waived compliance with the EBITDAR Covenant for
periods ending on any date from and including June 30, 2008 through March 31,
2009, and which reduced the minimum ratios AMR is required to satisfy
thereafter.  The required ratio will be 0.90 to 1.00 for the one
quarter period ending June 30, 2009 and will increase to 1.15 to 1.00 for the
four quarter period ending September 30, 2010.  Given fuel prices that
have been very high by historical standards and the volatility of fuel prices
and revenues, uncertainty in the capital markets and about other sources of
funding, and other factors, it is difficult to assess whether the Company will
be able to continue to comply with these covenants, and there are no assurances
that it will be able to do so.  Failure to comply with these covenants
would result in a default under the Credit Facility which – if the Company did
not take steps to obtain a waiver of, or otherwise mitigate, the default – could
result in a default under a significant amount of its other debt and lease
obligations, and otherwise have a material adverse impact on the Company and on
its ability to sustain its operations.

Credit Card Processing and Other
Reserves   American has agreements with a number of credit
card companies and processors to accept credit cards for the sale of air travel
and other services.  Under certain of American’s current credit card
processing agreements, the related credit card company or processor may hold
back, under certain circumstances, a reserve from American’s credit card
receivables.  American was not required to maintain any reserve under
these agreements in 2008.

Under one
such agreement, the amount of such reserve may be based on, among other things,
the amount of unrestricted cash (not including undrawn credit facilities) held
by American and American’s debt service coverage ratio, as defined in the
agreement.  In order to mitigate the impact of this potential reserve,
the Company drew down its $255 million revolving credit facility in September
2008.   Based on the Company’s current agreement, as amended in
2008, no reserves were required in 2008.  Given the volatility of fuel
prices and revenues, it is difficult to forecast the required amount of such
reserve at any time. The Company’s maximum holdback exposure is $200 million
through August 15, 2009.  However, if current conditions persist,
absent a waiver or modification of the agreement, such required amount could be
significantly greater than $200 million in the latter half of 2009.

Cash Flow
Activity   The Company’s cash flow
used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2008 was $1.4
billion and was primarily due to the dramatic year-over-year increase in
fuel prices which resulted in $2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel
expense in 2008 (based on the year-over-year increase in the average price per
gallon multiplied by gallons consumed).

Capital
expenditures during 2008 were $876 million and primarily included aircraft
purchase deposits and aircraft modifications.  See Note 6 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.

In 2008,
the Company reduced long-term debt and capital lease obligations (including
current maturities) by $185 million, while pursuing opportunities to generate
more cash through several transactions.  During 2008, the Company
raised $924 million through sale leasebacks of certain aircraft and loans
secured by aircraft.  In addition, AMR completed a public offering of
27.1 million shares of its common stock, generating net proceeds of $294
million.

The
Company also made scheduled and unscheduled debt and capital lease payments of
$1.1 billion in 2008.  Included in this amount, AMR purchased with
cash the $300 million principal amount of the 4.25 percent senior convertible
notes due 2023.  The holders of the 4.25 Notes exercised their
elective put rights and the Company purchased and retired these notes at a price
equal to 100 percent of their principal amount.  Under the terms of
the 4.25 Notes, the Company had the option to pay the purchase price with cash,
stock, or a combination of cash and stock, and the Company elected to pay for
the 4.25 Notes solely with cash.



 



 






 



Further,
the Company drew down its $255 million revolving credit facility in
2008.  The draw on the credit facility was intended to reduce the
amount of a potential credit card holdback reserve that could have been imposed
in the fourth quarter of 2008 based on the terms of one of the Company’s credit
card processing agreements.  The amount of the holdback reserve from
such agreement may be based on, among other things, the amount of unrestricted
cash (which does not include undrawn credit facilities) held by the Company and
the Company’s debt service coverage ratio.

For the
year ended December 31, 2008, the Company recognized net gains of approximately
$380 million, as opposed to $239 million in 2007, as a component of fuel expense
related to its fuel hedging agreements, including the ineffective portion of the
hedges.  As a result of the rapid decline in energy prices in the
second half of 2008 and certain other events, the Company estimates during the
next twelve months it will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss
into earnings approximately $711 million in net incremental expenses related to
its fuel derivative hedges (based on prices as of December 31,
2008).  These hedging expenses, however, are substantially outweighed
by the overall reduction in fuel expense resulting from the same decline in fuel
prices.  See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.

Due to
the current value of the Company’s derivative contracts, some agreements with
counterparties require collateral to be deposited by the Company.  As
of December 31, 2008, the cash collateral held by such counterparties from AMR
was $575 million.  The amount of collateral required to be deposited
with the Company or with the counterparty by the Company is based on fuel price
in relation to the market values of the derivative contracts and collateral
provisions per the terms of those contracts and can fluctuate
significantly.  These derivative contracts are currently required to
be collateralized at approximately 90 percent of the fair value of the liability
position.  As such, when these contracts settle (mainly in the first
half of 2009), the collateral posted with counterparties will effectively offset
the loss position and no further cash impact will be recorded assuming a static
forward heating oil curve from December 31, 2008.  Under the same
assumption, the Company does not currently expect to be required in 2009 to
deposit significant additional cash collateral above 2008 levels with
counterparties with regard to fuel hedges in place as of December 31,
2008.  Additional information regarding the Company’s fuel hedging
program is also included in Item 7(A) “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures
about Market Risk” and in Note 7 to the consolidated financial
statements.

In
September 2008, AMR completed the sale of American Beacon, which resulted in
total proceeds of $442 million and a net gain of $432 million.  The gain on
the sale is included in Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated
statement of operations.  While primarily a cash transaction, the
Company also maintained a minority equity stake in American Beacon.

In the
past, the Company has from time to time refinanced, redeemed or repurchased its
debt and taken other steps to reduce its debt or lease obligations or otherwise
improve its balance sheet.  Going forward, depending on market
conditions, its cash positions and other considerations, the Company may
continue to take such actions.

Compensation   On
January 27, 2009, the Company approved the 2009 Annual Incentive Plan (AIP) for
American.  All U.S. based employees of American are eligible to
participate in the AIP.  The AIP is American's annual bonus plan and
provides for the payment of awards in the event certain financial and/or
customer service metrics are satisfied.

Working
Capital   AMR (principally American) historically operates
with a working capital deficit, as do most other airline
companies.  In addition, the Company has historically relied heavily
on external financing to fund capital expenditures.  More recently,
the Company has also relied on external financing to fund operating losses,
employee pension obligations and debt maturities.

Off Balance Sheet
Arrangements   American has determined that it holds a
significant variable interest in, but is not the primary beneficiary of, certain
trusts that are the lessors under 84 of its aircraft operating leases. These
leases contain a fixed price purchase option, which allows American to purchase
the aircraft at a predetermined price on a specified date. However, American
does not guarantee the residual value of the aircraft.  As of December
31, 2008, future lease payments required under these leases totaled $1.7
billion.



 



 






 



Certain
special facility revenue bonds have been issued by certain municipalities
primarily to purchase equipment and improve airport facilities that are leased
by American and accounted for as operating leases.  Approximately $1.5
billion of these bonds (with total future payments of approximately $3.4 billion
as of December 31, 2008) are guaranteed by American, AMR, or
both.  Approximately $177 million of these special facility revenue
bonds contain mandatory tender provisions that require American to make
operating lease payments sufficient to repurchase the bonds at various times:
$112 million in 2014 and $65 million in 2015.  Although American has
the right to remarket the bonds, there can be no assurance that these bonds will
be successfully remarketed.  Any payments to redeem or purchase bonds
that are not remarketed would generally reduce existing rent leveling accruals
or be considered prepaid facility rentals and would reduce future operating
lease commitments.

In
addition, the Company had other operating leases, primarily for aircraft and
airport facilities, with total future lease payments of $4.1 billion as of
December 31, 2008.  Entering into aircraft leases allows the Company
to obtain aircraft without immediate cash outflows.



 



 






 



Contractual
Obligations

The
following table summarizes the Company’s obligations and commitments as of
December 31, 2008 (in millions):






 
      
 

Payments
      Due by Year(s) Ended December 31,

 



 
 
Contractual
      Obligations

 



 
Total

 
 



 
2009

 
 

2010
and
2011

 
 

2012
and
2013

 
 



2014
      and Beyond

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      lease payments for aircraft and facility obligations 1

 
 
9,187
 
 
 
998
 
 
 
1,854
 
 
 
1,391
 
 
 
4,944
 



Firm
      aircraft commitments 2

 
 
3,662
 
 
 
1,028
 
 
 
1,415
 
 
 
635
 
 
 
584
 



Capacity
      purchase agreements 3

 
 
205
 
 
 
68
 
 
 
120
 
 
 
17
 
 
 
-
 



Long-term
      debt 4

 
 
13,980
 
 
 
2,387
 
 
 
4,396
 
 
 
2,101
 
 
 
5,096
 



Capital
      lease obligations

 
 
1,127
 
 
 
182
 
 
 
289
 
 
 
180
 
 
 
476
 



Other
      purchase obligations 5

 
 
967
 
 
 
273
 
 
 
378
 
 
 
313
 
 
 
3
 



Other
      long-term liabilities 6

 
 
6,081
 
 
 
176
 
 
 
1,568
 
 
 
1,332
 
 
 
3,005
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      obligations and commitments

 
 
35,209
 
 
 
5,112
 
 
 
10,020
 
 
 
5,969
 
 
 
14,108
 










 
      


1


Certain
      special facility revenue bonds issued by municipalities - which are
      supported by operating leases executed by American - are guaranteed by AMR
      and/or American. The special facility revenue bonds with mandatory tender
      provisions discussed above are included in this table under their ultimate
      maturity date rather than their mandatory tender provision
      date.  See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for
      additional information.








 
      


2


As
      of December 31, 2008, the Company had firm commitments to acquire 29
      Boeing 737-800s in 2009, 39 Boeing 737-800s in 2010 and eight 737-800
      aircraft in 2011.  In addition to these aircraft, the Company
      has firm commitments for eleven 737-800 aircraft and seven Boeing 777
      aircraft scheduled to be delivered in 2013 - 2016.  Future
      payments for all aircraft, including the estimated amounts for price
      escalation, are currently estimated to be approximately $3.7 billion, with
      the majority occurring in 2009 through 2011.  Additional
      information about the Company’s obligations is included in Note 4 to the
      consolidated financial statements.








 
      


3


The
      table reflects minimum required payments under capacity purchase
      agreements between American and two regional airlines, Chautauqua
      Airlines, Inc. (Chautauqua) and Trans States Airlines, Inc.  If
      the Company terminates its contract with Chautauqua without cause,
      Chautauqua has the right to put its 15 Embraer aircraft to the
      Company.  If this were to happen, the Company would take
      possession of the aircraft and become liable for lease obligations
      totaling approximately $21 million per year with lease expirations in 2018
      and 2019.  These lease obligations are not included in the table
      above.  See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for
      additional information.








 
      


4


Amounts
      represent contractual amounts due, including interest.  Interest
      on variable rate debt was estimated based on the current rate at December
      31, 2008.








 
      5  
             


Includes
      noncancelable commitments to purchase goods or services, primarily
      information technology related support. The Company has made estimates as
      to the timing of certain payments primarily for construction related
      costs.  The actual timing of payments may vary from these
      estimates. Substantially all of the Company’s purchase orders issued for
      other purchases in the ordinary course of business contain a 30-day
      cancellation clause that allows the Company to cancel an order with 30
      days notice.








  
      6         


Includes
      minimum pension contributions based on actuarially determined estimates
      and other postretirement benefit payments based on estimated payments
      through 2017.  See Note 10 to the consolidated financial
      statements.





Pension
Obligations   The Company is required to make minimum
contributions to its defined benefit pension plans under the minimum funding
requirements of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), the Pension
Funding Equity Act of 2004 and the Pension Protection Act of 2006. The Company
is not required to make any 2009 contributions to its defined benefit pension
plans under the provisions of these acts.















The
Company’s obligation for pension and retiree medical and other benefits
increased from $3.6 billion at December 31, 2007 to $6.6 billion at December 31,
2008, largely the result of negative investment returns on the Company’s pension
assets in 2008 related to the broader stock market decline.  A
significant portion of this increase is recorded in Accumulated other
comprehensive loss, a component of stockholders’ equity. Consequently, the
Company’s 2009 pension expense will be substantially higher than in
2008.  Also, although the Company is not required to make
contributions to its defined benefit pension plans in 2009, based on current
funding levels of the plans, the Company expects that the amount of the required
contributions will be substantial in 2010 and future years (these estimates are
reflected in the above table).  The Company expects to contribute
approximately $13 million to its retiree medical and other benefit plan in
2009.

Results of
Operations

The
Company recorded a net loss of $2.1 billion in 2008 compared to net earnings of
$504 million in 2007.  The Company’s 2008 results include an
impairment charge of $1.1 billion to write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and
Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related long-lived assets down to their
estimated fair values, a $71 million accrual for employee severance cost and a
$33 million expense related to the grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft
prior to lease expiration, all in connection with announced capacity reductions
and included in Special charges in the Consolidated Statements of
Operations.  These charges are described in Note 2 to the consolidated
financial statements. In addition, the Company’s 2008 results include the sale
of American Beacon for a net gain of $432 million included in Miscellaneous-net
on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and the impact of a pension
settlement charge of $103 million for one of the Company’s defined benefit plans
included in Wages, salaries and benefits on the Consolidated Statements of
Operations and as described in Note 14 and Note 10, respectively.

The Company recorded net
earnings of $504 million in 2007 compared to $231 million in
2006.  The Company’s 2007 results reflected an improvement in revenues
somewhat offset by fuel prices and certain other costs that were higher in 2007
compared to 2006.  The 2007 and 2006 results were impacted by
productivity improvements and by cost reductions resulting from progress under
the Turnaround Plan.  The 2007 results include the impact of
several items including:  a $138 million gain on the sale of AMR’s
stake in ARINC included in Other Income, Miscellaneous – net, a $39 million gain
to reflect the positive impact of the change to an 18-month expiration of
AAdvantage miles included in Passenger revenue, and a $63 million charge
associated with the retirement and planned disposal of 24 MD-80 aircraft and
certain other equipment that previously had been temporarily stored included in
Special charges.



 



 






 



Revenues
2008 Compared to
2007    The Company’s revenues increased approximately
$831 million, or 3.6 percent, to $23.8 billion in 2008 compared to 2007.
American’s passenger revenues increased by 3.3 percent, or $583 million, despite
a significant capacity (available seat mile) (ASM) decrease of 3.8
percent.  American’s passenger load factor decreased approximately one
point to 80.6 percent and passenger revenue yield per passenger mile increased
8.6 percent to 13.84 cents.  This resulted in an increase in passenger
revenue per available seat mile (RASM) of 7.3 percent to 11.15 cents. In 2008,
American derived approximately 60 percent of its passenger revenues from
domestic operations and approximately 40 percent from international
operations.  Certain 2007 passenger revenues were reclassified to
conform with the current presentation, as described in Note 1 to the
consolidated financial statements.  Following is additional
information regarding American’s domestic and international RASM and
capacity:




 
      
 



Year
      Ended December 31, 2008

 


 
      
 

RASM
(cents)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 
 

ASMs
      (billions)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



DOT
      Domestic

 
 
10.81
 
 
 
5.5
%
 
 
101.9
 
 
 
(6.1
)%



International

 
 
11.71
 
 
 
10.1
 
 
 
61.7
 
 
 
0.5
 



   DOT
      Latin America

 
 
12.47
 
 
 
11.9
 
 
 
30.4
 
 
 
2.2
 



   DOT
      Atlantic

 
 
10.96
 
 
 
6.6
 
 
 
24.6
 
 
 
(1.4
)



   DOT
      Pacific

 
 
11.04
 
 
 
13.2
 
 
 
6.7
 
 
 
(0.4
)





Regional
Affiliates’ passenger revenues, which are based on industry standard proration
agreements for flights connecting to American flights, remained flat at $2.5
billion.  Regional Affiliates’ traffic decreased 10.2 percent to 8.8
billion revenue passenger miles (RPMs), while capacity decreased 6.0 percent to
12.6 billion ASMs, resulting in a 3.2 point decrease in passenger load factor to
70.2 percent.

Cargo
revenues increased 5.9 percent, or $49 million, primarily as a result of increased
fuel surcharges.

Other
revenues increased 9.2 percent, or $183 million, to $2.2 billion due to
increases in certain passenger service charges.



 



 






 



2007 Compared to
2006    The Company’s revenues increased approximately
$372 million, or 1.6 percent, to $22.9 billion in 2007 compared to 2006.
American’s passenger revenues increased by 2.1 percent, or $360 million, despite
a capacity (available seat mile) (ASM) decrease of 2.4
percent.  American’s passenger load factor increased 1.4 points to
81.5 percent and passenger revenue yield per passenger mile increased 2.8
percent to 12.75 cents.  This resulted in an increase in passenger
revenue per available seat mile (RASM) of 4.6 percent to 10.39 cents. In 2007,
American derived approximately 63 percent of its passenger revenues from
domestic operations and approximately 37 percent from international operations.
Certain 2007 and 2006 passenger revenues were reclassified to conform with the
current presentation, as described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements.  Following is additional information regarding American’s
domestic and international RASM and capacity:




 
      
 



Year
      Ended December 31, 2007

 


 
      
 

RASM
(cents)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 
 

ASMs
      (billions)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



DOT
      Domestic

 
 
10.3
 
 
 
3.4
%
 
 
108.5
 
 
 
(2.6
)%



International

 
 
10.6
 
 
 
6.6
 
 
 
61.4
 
 
 
(2.0
)



   DOT
      Latin America

 
 
11.1
 
 
 
6.7
 
 
 
29.6
 
 
 
0.9
 



   DOT
      Atlantic

 
 
10.3
 
 
 
2.7
 
 
 
25.0
 
 
 
(0.5
)



   DOT
      Pacific

 
 
9.8
 
 
 
18.6
 
 
 
6.8
 
 
 
(17.1
)





Regional
Affiliates’ passenger revenues, which are based on industry standard proration
agreements for flights connecting to American flights, decreased $32 million, or
1.3 percent, to $2.5 billion as a result of decreased capacity and load
factors.  Regional Affiliates’ traffic decreased 1.2 percent to 9.8
billion revenue passenger miles (RPMs), while capacity decreased 1.0 percent to
13.4 billion ASMs, resulting in a 0.2 point decrease in passenger load factor to
73.4 percent.

Cargo
revenues decreased 0.2 percent, or $2 million primarily as a result of lower
freight traffic.

Other
revenues increased 2.4 percent, or $46 million, to $1.9 billion due in part to
increases in certain passenger service charges and higher passenger
volumes.


 



 






 



Operating
Expenses
2008 Compared to
2007 The Company’s total operating expenses increased 16.8 percent, or
$3.7 billion, to $25.7 billion in 2008 compared to 2007.  American’s
mainline operating expenses per ASM in 2008 increased 21.9 percent compared to
2007 to 13.87 cents. The increase in operating expense was largely due to a
dramatic year-over-year increase in fuel prices from $2.13 per gallon in 2007 to
$3.03 per gallon in 2008, including the impact of fuel hedging.  Fuel
expense was the Company’s largest single expense category and the price increase
resulted in $2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel expense in 2008
(based on the year-over-year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied
by gallons consumed, inclusive of the impact of fuel hedging).  A
return to the recent historically high fuel prices and/or disruptions in the
supply of fuel would further materially adversely affect the Company’s financial
condition and results of operations.  The remaining increase in
operating expense was due to the second quarter 2008 impairment charge of $1.1
billion to write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and Embraer RJ-135 fleets and
certain related long-lived assets down to their estimated fair values and
certain other special charges and employee charges, as discussed previously in
Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations”.










(in
      millions)
 
Operating
      Expenses

 

Year
      ended December 31, 2008

 
 



Change
      from 2007

 
 



Percentage
      Change

 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



Aircraft
      fuel

 
$
9,014
 
 
$
2,344
 
 
 
35.1
%

 
      (a)




Wages,
      salaries and benefits

 
 
6,655
 
 
 
(115
)
 
 
(1.7
)
 
      



Other
      rentals and landing fees

 
 
1,298
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
1.6
 
 
      



Depreciation
      and amortization

 
 
1,207
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
0.4
 
 
      



Maintenance,
      materials and repairs

 
 
1,237
 
 
 
180
 
 
 
17.0
 

 
      (b)




Commissions,
      booking fees and credit card expense

 
 
 997
 
 
 
(31
)
 
 
(3.0
)
 
      



Aircraft
      rentals

 
 
492
 
 
 
(99
)
 
 
(16.8
)

 
      (c)




Food
      service

 
 
518
 
 
 
(16
)
 
 
(3.0
)
 
      



Special
      charges

 
 
1,213
 
 
 
1,150
 
 
 
*
 

 
      (d)




Other
      operating expenses

 
 
3,024
 
 
 
247
 
 
 
8.9
 

 
      (e)




Total
      operating expenses

 
$
25,655
 
 
$
3,685
 
 
 
16.8
%
 
      








        * Not
meaningful




(a)  


Aircraft
      fuel expense increased primarily due to a 42.4 percent increase in the
      Company’s price per gallon of fuel (net of the impact of hedging gains of
      $380 million) offset by a 5.1 percent decrease in the Company’s fuel
      consumption, primarily due to reductions in available seat
      miles.








(b)  


Maintenance,
      materials and repairs expense increased due to a heavier workscope of
      scheduled and unscheduled airframe maintenance overhauls, dependability
      initiatives, repair costs and volume, and contractual engine repair rates,
      which are driven by aircraft age.








(c)  


Aircraft
      rental expense decreased principally due to lease expirations of Boeing
      757 and McDonnell Douglas MD-80
aircraft.








(d)  


Special
      charges are related to an impairment charge in the second quarter of 2008
      of $1.1 billion to write down the Company’s McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and
      Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related long-lived assets to their
      estimated fair values. This impairment charge was triggered by the record
      increase in fuel prices over the preceding twelve months.  In
      addition, the Company accrued $71 million for severance costs and $33
      million related to the grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft prior to
      lease expiration, both related to the capacity
  reductions.








(e)  


Other
      operating expenses increased due in part to an increase in foreign
      exchange losses of $70 million.





 


 



 






 



2007 Compared to
2006   The
Company’s total operating expenses increased 2.2 percent, or $467 million, to
$22.0 billion in 2007 compared to 2006.  American’s mainline operating
expenses per ASM in 2007 increased 4.4 percent compared to 2006 to 11.38 cents.
This increase in operating expenses per ASM is due primarily to a 5.6 percent
increase in American’s price per gallon of fuel (net of the impact of fuel
hedging) in 2007 relative to 2006.









(in
      millions)
 
Operating
      Expenses

 

Year
      ended December 31, 2007

 
 



Change
      from 2006

 
 



Percentage
      Change

 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



Wages,
      salaries and benefits

 
$
6,770
 
 
$
(43
)
 
 
(0.6
)%
 
      



Aircraft
      fuel

 
 
6,670
 
 
 
268
 
 
 
4.2
 

 
      (a)




Other
      rentals and landing fees

 
 
1,278
 
 
 
(5
)
 
 
(0.4
)
 
      



Depreciation
      and amortization

 
 
1,202
 
 
 
45
 
 
 
3.9
 
 
      



Maintenance,
      materials and repairs

 
 
1,057
 
 
 
86
 
 
 
8.9
 

 
      (b)




Commissions,
      booking fees and credit card expense

 
 
1,028
 
 
 
(47
)
 
 
(4.5
)
 
      



Aircraft
      rentals

 
 
591
 
 
 
(15
)
 
 
(2.5
)
 
      



Food
      service

 
 
534
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
5.1
 
 
      



Special
      charges

 
 
63
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
*
 

 
      (c)




Other
      operating expenses

 
 
2,777
 
 
 
89
 
 
 
3.2
 
 
      



Total
      operating expenses

 
$
21,970
 
 
$
467
 
 
 
2.2
%
 
      







       
* Not
meaningful
 




(a)  


Aircraft
      fuel expense increased primarily due to a 5.6 percent increase in
      American’s price per gallon of fuel (net of the impact of hedging gains of
      $239 million) offset by a 1.6 percent decrease in American’s fuel
      consumption.








(b)  


Maintenance,
      materials and repairs expense increased primarily due to $57 million in
      heavier workscope of scheduled airframe maintenance overhauls, repair
      costs and volume, and contractual engine repair rates, which are driven by
      aircraft age.








(c)  


Special
      charges increased due to a $63 million charge for the retirement of 24
      MD-80 aircraft and certain related
equipment.





Other
Income (Expense)
Other
income (expense) consists of interest income and expense, interest capitalized
and miscellaneous - net.

2008 Compared to
2007 Decreases in both short-term investment balances and interest rates
caused a decrease in Interest income of $156 million, or 46.4 percent, to $181
million.  Interest expense decreased $158 million, or 17.2 percent, to
$756 million primarily as a result of a decrease in the Company’s long-term debt
balance.  Miscellaneous – net includes a gain of $432 million for the
sale of American Beacon.

2007 Compared to
2006 Increases in both short-term investment balances and interest rates
caused an increase in Interest income of $58 million, or 20.8 percent, to $337
million.  Interest expense decreased $116 million, or 11.2 percent, to
$914 million primarily as a result of prepayment and repayment of existing
debt.  Miscellaneous – net includes a gain of $138 million for the
sale of ARINC.
 
Income Tax Benefit




The
Company did not record a net tax provision or benefit associated with its 2008
losses or its 2007 or 2006 earnings due to the Company providing a valuation
allowance, as discussed in Note 8 to the consolidated financial
statements.




















Operating
Statistics
The
following table provides statistical information for American and Regional
Affiliates for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.





 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines, Inc. Mainline Jet Operations

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Revenue
      passenger miles (millions)

 
 
131,757
 
 
 
138,453
 
 
 
139,454
 



Available
      seat miles (millions)

 
 
163,532
 
 
 
169,906
 
 
 
174,021
 



Cargo
      ton miles (millions)

 
 
2,005
 
 
 
2,122
 
 
 
2,224
 



Passenger
      load factor

 
 
80.6
%
 
 
81.5
%
 
 
80.1
%



Passenger
      revenue yield per passenger mile (cents) (^)

 
 
13.84
 
 
 
12.75
 
 
 
12.40
 



Passenger
      revenue per available seat mile (cents) (^)

 
 
11.15
 
 
 
10.39
 
 
 
9.94
 



Cargo
      revenue yield per ton mile (cents)

 
 
43.59
 
 
 
38.86
 
 
 
37.18
 



Operating
      expenses per available seat mile, excluding Regional Affiliates
      (cents) (*)

 
 
 13.87
 
 
 
 11.38
 
 
 
10.90
 



Fuel
      consumption (gallons, in millions)

 
 
2,694
 
 
 
2,834
 
 
 
2,881
 



Fuel
      price per gallon (cents)

 
 
302.6
 
 
 
212.1
 
 
 
200.8
 



Operating
      aircraft at year-end

 
 
626
 
 
 
655
 
 
 
697
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Regional
      Affiliates

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Revenue
      passenger miles (millions)

 
 
8,846
 
 
 
9,848
 
 
 
9,972
 



Available
      seat miles (millions)

 
 
12,603
 
 
 
13,414
 
 
 
13,554
 



Passenger
      load factor

 
 
70.2
%
 
 
73.4
%
 
 
73.6
%










(*)  Excludes
      $3.1 billion, $2.8 billion and $2.7 billion of expense incurred related to
      Regional Affiliates in 2008, 2007
and










2006,
      respectively.





(^) Reflects the impact of the
reclassification of certain 2007 and 2006 passenger revenues to conform with the
current presentation, as described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements.  





 
      


Outlook





The
Company currently expects capacity for American’s mainline jet operations to
decline by 8.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 versus first quarter
2008.  American’s mainline capacity for the full year 2009 is expected to
decrease approximately 6.5 percent from 2008 with a 9.0 percent reduction in
domestic capacity and more than a 2.5 percent decrease in international
capacity. 

The
Company currently expects first quarter 2009 mainline unit costs to decrease
approximately 2.9 percent year over year.  The first quarter 2009 and
full year 2009 unit cost expectations reflect the reduction in the cost of fuel
during the last quarter of 2008, somewhat offset by increased defined benefit
pension expenses and retiree medical and other expenses (due to the stock market
decline), and by cost pressures associated with the Company’s previously
announced capacity reductions and dependability initiatives.  Due to
these cost pressures, the Company expects first quarter and full year 2009 unit
costs excluding fuel to be higher than the respective prior year
periods.  The Company’s results are significantly affected by the
price of jet fuel, which is in turn affected by a number of factors beyond the
Company’s control.  Although fuel prices have abated somewhat from the
record prices recorded in July 2008, fuel prices are still very
volatile.

The
Company is experiencing significantly weaker
demand for air travel driven by the severe downturn in the global
economy.  The Company implemented capacity reductions in 2008 in
response to record high fuel prices which have somewhat mitigated this weakening
of demand, and has now announced further reductions to the 2009 capacity
plan.  However, if the global economic downturn persists or worsens,
demand for air travel may continue to weaken.  No assurance can be
given that capacity reductions or other steps we may take will be adequate to
offset the effects of reduced demand.



 



 






 



Other
Information

Critical Accounting Policies and
Estimates   The preparation of the Company’s financial
statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in
the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.  The
Company believes its estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, actual
results and the timing of the recognition of such amounts could differ from
those estimates.  The Company has identified the following critical
accounting policies and estimates used by management in the preparation of the
Company’s financial statements: accounting for fair value, long-lived assets,
routes, passenger revenue, frequent flyer program, stock compensation, pensions
and retiree medical and other benefits, income taxes and derivatives
accounting.

Fair value
– The Company has adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157
“Fair Value Measurements” (SFAS 157) as it applies to financial assets and
liabilities effective January 1, 2008.  The Company's routes are
not yet subject to SFAS 157. SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a
framework for measuring fair value under generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP) and enhances disclosures about fair value measurements. Fair
value is defined under SFAS 157 as the exchange price that would be received for
an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or
most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants on the measurement date.   For
additional information on the fair value of certain financial assets and
liabilities, see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.

Under
SFAS 157, AMR utilizes several valuation techniques in order to assess the fair
value of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities.  The
Company’s fuel derivative contracts, which primarily consist of commodity
options and collars, are valued using energy and commodity market data which is
derived by combining raw inputs with quantitative models and processes to
generate forward curves and volatilities.  The Company’s short-term
investments primarily utilize broker quotes in a non-active market for valuation
of these securities.

Long-lived
assets – The Company has approximately $17 billion of long-lived assets
as of December 31, 2008, including approximately $16 billion related to flight
equipment and other fixed assets.  In addition to the original cost of
these assets, the recorded value of the Company’s fixed assets is impacted by a
number of estimates made by the Company, including estimated useful lives,
salvage values and the Company’s determination as to whether aircraft are
temporarily or permanently grounded.  In accordance with Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting for the Impairment or
Disposal of Long-Lived Assets” (SFAS 144), the Company records impairment
charges on long-lived assets used in operations when events and circumstances
indicate that the assets may be impaired, the undiscounted cash flows estimated
to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amount of those
assets and the net book value of the assets exceeds their estimated fair value.
In making these determinations, the Company uses certain assumptions, including,
but not limited to: (i) estimated fair value of the assets; and (ii) estimated
future cash flows expected to be generated by the assets, generally evaluated at
a fleet level, which are based on additional assumptions such as asset
utilization, length of service and estimated salvage values. A change in the
Company's fleet plan has been the primary indicator that has resulted in an
impairment charge in the past.

The
majority of American’s fleet types are depreciated over 30 years.  It
is possible that the ultimate lives of the Company’s aircraft will be
significantly different than the current estimate due to unforeseen events in
the future that impact the Company’s fleet plan, including positive or negative
developments in the areas described above.  For example, operating the
aircraft for a longer period will result in higher maintenance, fuel and other
operating costs than if the Company replaced the aircraft.  At some
point in the future, higher operating costs, including higher fuel expense,
and/or improvement in the Company’s economic condition, could change the
Company’s analysis of the impact of retaining aircraft versus replacing them
with new aircraft.

In the
second quarter of 2008, in connection with the May 21, 2008 announcement
regarding capacity reductions and related matters, the Company concluded a
triggering event had occurred and required that fixed assets be tested for
impairment.  As a result of that testing, the Company recorded
impairment charges related to its McDonnell Douglas MD-80 aircraft and Embraer
RJ-135 aircraft.  With respect to all other fleets, the gross cash
flows of the remaining estimated useful lives exceeded the recorded value and no
impairment was necessary.  See Note 2 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional information with respect to these impairment
charges.
 

















In the
fourth quarter of 2007, the Company permanently grounded and held for disposal
24 McDonnell Douglas MD-80 airframes and certain other equipment, all 24 of
which had previously been in temporary storage. See further discussion in Note 2
to the consolidated financial statements.
 
Routes -- AMR performs annual
impairment tests on its routes, which are indefinite life intangible assets
under Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142 "Goodwill and Other
Intangibles" and as a result they are not amortized. The Company also performs
impairment tests when events and circumstances indicate that the assets might be
impaired.  These tests are primarily based on estimates of discounted
future cash flows, using assumptions based on historical results adjusted to
reflect the Company’s best estimate of future market and operating
conditions.   The net carrying value of assets not recoverable is
reduced to fair value. The Company's estimates of fair value represent its best
estimate based on industry trends and reference to market rates and
transactions.

The   Company   had   recorded  route  acquisition  costs   (including
international routes and slots) of $828 million as of December
31,  2008,
including  a  significant  amount  related  to  operations  at  London
Heathrow.  The Company has completed an impairment analysis on the
London Heathrow routes (including slots) and has concluded that no impairment
exists.   The Company believes its estimates and assumptions are
reasonable; however, given the significant uncertainty regarding how the recent
open skies agreement will ultimately affect the Company’s operations at
Heathrow, the actual results could differ from those estimates.  See
Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.





 
      


Passenger
      revenue –
      Passenger ticket sales are initially recorded as a component of Air
      traffic liability.  Revenue derived from ticket sales is
      recognized at the time service is provided.  However, due to
      various factors, including the industry’s pricing structure and interline
      agreements throughout the industry, certain amounts are recognized in
      revenue using estimates regarding both the timing of the revenue
      recognition and the amount of revenue to be recognized, including
      breakage. These estimates are generally based upon the evaluation of
      historical trends, including the use of regression analysis and other
      methods to model the outcome of future events based on the Company’s
      historical experience, and are recognized at the scheduled time of
      departure. The Company’s estimation techniques have been applied
      consistently from year to year.  However, due to changes in the
      Company’s ticket refund policy and changes in the travel profile of
      customers, historical trends may not be representative of future
      results.





Frequent flyer
program –
American uses the incremental cost method to account for the portion of its
frequent flyer liability incurred when AAdvantage members earn mileage credits
by flying on American or its regional affiliates.

The
Company considers breakage in its incremental cost calculation and recognizes
breakage on AAdvantage miles sold over the estimated period of usage for sold
miles that are ultimately redeemed.  The Company calculates its
breakage estimate using separate breakage rates for miles earned by flying on
American and miles earned through other companies who have purchased AAdvantage
miles for distribution to their customers, due to differing behavior
patterns.

Management
considers historical patterns of account breakage to be a useful indicator when
estimating future breakage. Future program redemption opportunities can
significantly alter customer behavior from historical patterns with respect to
inactive accounts. Such changes may result in material changes to the deferred
revenue balance, as well as recognized revenues from the program.

American
includes fuel, food, passenger insurance and reservations/ticketing costs in the
calculation of incremental cost.  These estimates are generally
updated based upon the Company’s 12-month historical average of such
costs.  American also accrues a frequent flyer liability for the
mileage credits expected to be used for travel on participating airlines based
on historical usage patterns and contractual rates.

Revenue
earned from selling AAdvantage miles to other companies is recognized in two
components.  The first component represents the revenue for air
transportation sold and is valued at fair value.  This revenue is
deferred and recognized over the period the mileage is expected to be used,
which is currently estimated to be 28 months.  The second revenue
component, representing the marketing services sold, is recognized as related
services are provided.



 



 






 



The
Company’s total liability for future AAdvantage award redemptions for free,
discounted or upgraded travel on American, American Eagle or participating
airlines as well as unrecognized revenue from selling AAdvantage miles to other
companies was approximately $1.7 billion and $1.6 billion at December 31, 2008
and 2007, respectively (and is recorded as a component of Air traffic liability
in the consolidated balance sheets), representing 18.2 percent and 18.7 percent
of AMR's total current liabilities, at December 31, 2008 and 2007,
respectively.

The
number of free travel awards used for travel on American and American Eagle was
3.1 million in 2008 and 2.6 million in 2007 representing approximately 9.7 and
7.5 percent of passengers boarded in each year, respectively. The Company
believes displacement of revenue passengers is minimal given the Company’s load
factors, its ability to manage frequent flyer seat inventory, and the relatively
low ratio of free award usage to total passengers boarded.

Changes
to the percentage of the amount of revenue deferred, deferred recognition
period, percentage of awards expected to be redeemed for travel on participating
airlines, breakage or cost per mile estimates could have a significant impact on
the Company’s revenues or incremental cost accrual in the year of the change as
well as in future years.

Stock
Compensation – AMR accounts for
its stock compensation under the fair value recognition provisions of Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123(R) "Share-Based Payment". The Company
grants awards under its various share based payment plans and utilizes option
pricing models or fair value models to estimate the fair value of its
awards.  Certain awards contain a market performance condition, which
is taken into account in estimating the fair value on the date of grant.
 The fair value of those awards is calculated by multiplying the stock
price on the date of grant by the expected payout percentage and the number of
shares granted.  The Company accounts for these awards over the three
year term of the award based on the grant date fair value, provided adequate
shares are available to settle the awards.  For awards where adequate
shares are not anticipated to be available or that only permit settlement in
cash, the fair value is re-measured each reporting period.  

Pensions and
retiree medical and other benefits – The Company accounts
for its pension and retiree medical and other benefits
under  Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 158 “Employers’
Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans” (SFAS
158).  SFAS 158 requires the Company to recognize the funded status
(i.e., the difference between the fair value of plan assets and the projected
benefit obligations) of its pension and postretirement plans in the consolidated
balance sheet with a corresponding adjustment to Accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss).

The
Company’s pension and other postretirement benefit costs and liabilities are
calculated using various actuarial assumptions and methodologies. The Company
uses certain assumptions including, but not limited to, the selection of the:
(i) discount rate; (ii) expected return on plan assets; and (iii) expected
health care cost trend rate and starting in 2007, the (iv) estimated age of
pilot retirement (as discussed below).

These
assumptions as of December 31 were:





 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Discount
      rate

 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%



Expected
      return on plan assets

 
 
8.75
%
 
 
8.75
%



Expected
      health care cost trend rate:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



     Pre-65
      individuals

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



         Initial

 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%



         Ultimate

 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%



     Post-65
      individuals

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



         Initial

 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%



         Ultimate
      (2010)

 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%



Pilot
      Retirement Age

 
 
63
 
 
 
63
 



 


The
Company’s discount rate is determined based upon the review of year-end high
quality corporate bond rates. Lowering the discount rate by 50 basis points as
of December 31, 2008 would increase the Company’s pension and postretirement
benefits obligations by approximately $643 million and $150 million,
respectively, and increase estimated 2009 pension and postretirement benefits
expense by $66 million and $16 million, respectively.











The
expected return on plan assets is based upon an evaluation of the Company's
historical trends and experience taking into account current and expected market
conditions and the Company’s target asset allocation of 35 percent longer
duration corporate and U.S. government/agency bonds, 25 percent U.S. value
stocks, 20 percent developed international stocks, five percent emerging markets
stocks and bonds and 15 percent alternative (private) investments. The expected
return on plan assets component of the Company’s net periodic benefit cost is
calculated based on the fair value of plan assets and the Company’s target asset
allocation.  The Company monitors its actual asset allocation and
believes that its long-term asset allocation will continue to approximate its
target allocation.  The Company’s historical annualized ten-year rate
of return on plan assets, calculated using a geometric compounding of monthly
returns, is approximately 6.81 percent as of December 31, 2008.  This
rate of return was significantly impacted by market conditions in the latter
half of 2008.  Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on plan
assets by 50 basis points as of December 31, 2008 would increase estimated 2009
pension expense by approximately $32 million.

The
health care cost trend rate is based upon an evaluation of the Company's
historical trends and experience taking into account current and expected market
conditions.  Increasing the assumed health care cost trend rate by 100
basis points would increase estimated 2009 postretirement benefits expense by
$20 million.

In 2007,
the Fair Treatment for Experienced Pilots Act (H.R. 4343) was signed into law,
raising the mandatory retirement age for commercial pilots from 60 to
65.  Previously, The Federal Aviation Administration required
commercial pilots to retire once they reached age 60.  The Company’s
pilot pension and other postretirement plans continue to permit a pilot to
retire as before at age 60, but the Company believes that many pilots will
choose to fly past age 60.  As a result of the new legislation, the
Company has estimated the average retirement age for the pilot workgroup to be
63, based on the approximate retirement age of the Company’s other work groups,
which did not have the same mandatory retirement age.  This change in
the estimate caused a decrease to the pension and other postretirement liability
of approximately $543 million in 2007.  See Note 10 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information. 

Income
taxes – The
Company generally believes that the positions taken on previously filed income
tax returns are more likely than not to be sustained by the taxing
authorities.  The Company has recorded income tax and related interest
liabilities where the Company believes its position may not be sustained or
where the full income tax benefit will not be recognized.  In
accordance with the standards of Financial Accounting Standards Board
Interpretation No. 48 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
Taxes- an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109” (FIN 48), the
effects of potential income tax benefits resulting from the Company’s
unrecognized tax positions are not reflected in the tax balances of the
financial statements.  Recognized and unrecognized tax positions are
reviewed and adjusted as events occur that affect the Company’s judgment about
the recognizability of income tax benefits, such as lapsing of applicable
statutes of limitations, conclusion of tax audits, release of administrative
guidance, or rendering of a court decision affecting a particular tax
position.  Under SFAS 109, the Company records a deferred tax asset
valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of
its deferred tax assets will not be realized.  The Company considers
its historical earnings, trends, and outlook for future years in making this
determination.  The Company had a deferred tax valuation allowance of
$2.7 billion and $625 million, respectively, at December 31, 2008 and 2007. See
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.

Derivatives – As required by
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative
Instruments and Hedging Activity” (SFAS 133), the Company assesses, both at the
inception of each hedge and on an on-going basis, whether the derivatives that
are used in its hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes
in cash flows of the hedged items.  In doing so, the Company uses a
regression model to determine the correlation of the change in prices of the
commodities used to hedge jet fuel (e.g. NYMEX Heating oil) to the change in the
price of jet fuel.  The Company also monitors the actual dollar offset
of the hedges’ market values as compared to hypothetical jet fuel
hedges.  The fuel hedge contracts are generally deemed to be “highly
effective” if the R-squared is greater than 80 percent and the dollar offset
correlation is within 80 percent to 125 percent.  The Company
discontinues hedge accounting prospectively if it determines that a derivative
is no longer expected to be highly effective as a hedge or if it decides to
discontinue the hedging relationship.  As of December 31 2008, the
Company had derivative contracts in a net liability position at fair value
of $528 million including a liability related to contracts that settled in
December.  A deferred loss of $876 million was recorded in Other
comprehensive income at December 31, 2008, and will be recognized in future
periods as contracts settle.



 



 






 



New
Accounting Pronouncements   

In
May 2008, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) affirmed the
consensus of FASB Staff Position APB 14-1 (FSP APB 14-1), “Accounting for
Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion
(Including Partial Cash Settlement),” which applies to all convertible debt
instruments that have a ‘‘net settlement feature’’, which means that such
convertible debt instruments, by their terms, may be settled either wholly or
partially in cash upon conversion. FSP APB 14-1 requires issuers of
convertible debt instruments that may be settled wholly or partially in cash
upon conversion to separately account for the liability and equity components in
a manner reflective of the issuers’ nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. FSP APB
14-1 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2008, and interim periods within those fiscal
years.  Early adoption is not permitted and retroactive application to
all periods presented is required.  The adoption of FSP APB 14-1 will
affect the historical accounting for the 4.25 percent senior convertible notes
due 2023 (the 4.25 Notes) and the 4.50 percent senior convertible notes due 2024
(the 4.50 Notes), and will result in increased interest expense of approximately
$5 million in 2009, as well as a $47 million, $48 million and $42 million
increase to 2008, 2007 and 2006 interest expense, respectively, upon
retrospective application in the first quarter of 2009.  When the
Company applies this FSP APB 14-1 retroactively in the first quarter of 2009, a
Form 8-K will be filed to reflect the adjustments due to its adoption for 2007
and 2008.  The impact on the balance sheet will not be
significant.




 



 






 



ITEM
7(A).QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK

Market Risk Sensitive
Instruments and Positions

The risk
inherent in the Company’s market risk sensitive instruments and positions is the
potential loss arising from adverse changes in the price of fuel, foreign
currency exchange rates and interest rates as discussed below.  The
sensitivity analyses presented do not consider the effects that such adverse
changes may have on overall economic activity, nor do they consider additional
actions management may take to mitigate the Company’s exposure to such
changes.  Therefore, actual results may differ.  The Company
does not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for accounting policies and
additional information.

Aircraft
Fuel   The Company’s earnings are affected by changes in
the price and availability of aircraft fuel.  In order to provide a
measure of control over price and supply, the Company trades and ships fuel and
maintains fuel storage facilities to support its flight
operations.  The Company also manages the price risk of fuel costs
primarily by using jet fuel and heating oil hedging contracts.  Market
risk is estimated as a hypothetical 10 percent increase in the December 31, 2008
and 2007 cost per gallon of fuel.  Based on projected 2009 fuel usage,
such an increase would result in an increase to aircraft fuel expense of
approximately $399 million in 2009, inclusive of the impact of effective fuel
hedge instruments outstanding at December 31, 2008, and assumes the Company’s
fuel hedging program remains effective under Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging
Activities”.  Comparatively, based on projected 2008 fuel usage, such
an increase would have resulted in an increase to aircraft fuel expense of
approximately $649 million in 2008, inclusive of the impact of fuel hedge
instruments outstanding at December 31, 2007.  The change in market
risk is primarily due to the decrease in fuel prices.  As of January
2009, the Company had cash flow hedges, with collars and options, covering
approximately 35 percent of its estimated 2009 fuel
requirements.  Comparatively, as of December 31, 2007 the Company had
hedged, with collars and options, approximately 24 percent of its estimated 2008
fuel requirements.  The consumption hedged for 2009 by cash flow
hedges is capped at an average price of approximately $2.59 per gallon of jet
fuel, and the Company’s collars have an average floor price of approximately
$1.94 per gallon of jet fuel (both the capped and floor price exclude taxes and
transportation costs).  The Company’s collars represent approximately
32 percent of its estimated 2009 fuel requirements.  A deterioration
of the Company’s financial position could negatively affect the Company’s
ability to hedge fuel in the future.

As of
December 31, 2008, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months it
will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings
approximately $711 million in net incremental expense (based on prices as of
December 31, 2008) related to its fuel derivative hedges, including expenses
from terminated contracts with a bankrupt counterparty and unwound
trades.

Ineffectiveness
is inherent in hedging jet fuel with derivative positions based in crude oil or
other crude oil related commodities.  As required by Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments
and Hedging Activity” (SFAS 133), the Company assesses, both at the inception of
each hedge and on an on-going basis, whether the derivatives that are used in
its hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in cash
flows of the hedged items.  In doing so, the Company uses a regression
model to determine the correlation of the change in prices of the commodities
used to hedge jet fuel (e.g. NYMEX Heating oil) to the change in the price of
jet fuel.  The Company also monitors the actual dollar offset of the
hedges’ market values as compared to hypothetical jet fuel
hedges.  The fuel hedge contracts are generally deemed to be “highly
effective” if the R-squared is greater than 80 percent and the dollar offset
correlation is within 80 percent to 125 percent.  The Company
discontinues hedge accounting prospectively if it determines that a derivative
is no longer expected to be highly effective as a hedge or if it decides to
discontinue the hedging relationship.




 



 






 



Foreign
Currency   The Company is exposed to the effect of foreign
exchange rate fluctuations on the U.S. dollar value of foreign
currency-denominated operating revenues and expenses.  The Company’s
largest exposure comes from the British pound, Euro, Canadian dollar, Japanese
yen and various Latin American currencies. The Company does not currently have a
foreign currency hedge program related to its foreign currency-denominated
ticket sales.  A uniform 10 percent strengthening in the value of the
U.S. dollar from December 31, 2008 and 2007 levels relative to each of the
currencies in which the Company has foreign currency exposure would result in a
decrease in operating income of approximately $146 million and $132 million for
the years ending December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, due to the Company’s
foreign-denominated revenues exceeding its foreign-denominated
expenses.  This sensitivity analysis was prepared based upon projected
2009 and 2008 foreign currency-denominated revenues and expenses as of December
31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.

Interest   The
Company’s earnings are also affected by changes in interest rates due to the
impact those changes have on its interest income from cash and short-term
investments, and its interest expense from variable-rate debt
instruments.  The Company’s largest exposure with respect to
variable-rate debt comes from changes in the London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR). The Company had variable-rate debt instruments representing
approximately 28 percent and 22 percent of its total long-term debt at December
31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.  If the Company’s interest rates
average 10 percent more in 2009 than they did at December 31, 2008, the
Company’s interest expense would increase by approximately $13 million and
interest income from cash and short-term investments would increase by
approximately $7 million.  In comparison, at December 31, 2007, the
Company estimated that if interest rates averaged 10 percent more in 2008 than
they did at December 31, 2007, the Company’s interest expense would have
increased by approximately $14 million and interest income from cash and
short-term investments would have increased by approximately $25
million.  These amounts are determined by considering the impact of
the hypothetical interest rates on the Company’s variable-rate long-term debt
and cash and short-term investment balances at December 31, 2008 and
2007.

Market
risk for fixed-rate long-term debt is estimated as the potential increase in
fair value resulting from a hypothetical 10 percent decrease in interest rates,
and amounts to approximately $297 million and $326 million as of December 31,
2008 and 2007, respectively. The fair values of the Company’s long-term debt
were estimated using quoted market prices or discounted future cash flows based
on the Company’s incremental borrowing rates for similar types of borrowing
arrangements.




 



 






 



ITEM
8.                 CONSOLIDATED
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS







 
      
 

Page

 


 
      
 
 
 



Report
      of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

 
 
51
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Statements of Operations

 
 
52
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Balance Sheets

 
 
53-54
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Statements of Cash Flows

 
 
55
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)

 
 
56
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Notes
      to Consolidated Financial Statements

 
 
57-85
 








 



 






 



Report
of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 

The Board
of Directors and Stockholders
AMR
Corporation
 
We have
audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of AMR Corporation as of
December 31, 2008 and 2007 and the related consolidated statements of
operations, stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flows for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2008.  Our audits also included
the financial statement schedule listed in the Index at Item
15(a)(2).  These consolidated financial statements and schedule are
the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on these financial statements and schedule based on our
audits.
 
We
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
In our
opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all
material respects, the consolidated financial position of AMR Corporation at
December 31, 2008 and 2007 and the consolidated results of their operations and
their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2008 in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles.  Also, in our opinion, the related financial statement
schedule, when considered in relation to the basic financial statements taken as
a whole, present fairly in all material respects the information set forth
therein.

We also
have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States), AMR Corporation’s internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2008, based on criteria established in
Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 18, 2009
expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 
 
/s/
Ernst & Young LLP


Dallas,
Texas
February
18, 2009

 


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS








(in
      millions, except per share amounts)

 


 
      
 
 
 


 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



Revenues

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Passenger  -
      American Airlines

 
$
18,234
 
 
$
17,651
 
 
$
17,291
 



    - Regional
      Affiliates

 
 
2,486
 
 
 
2,470
 
 
 
2,502
 



Cargo

 
 
874
 
 
 
825
 
 
 
827
 



Other
      revenues

 
 
2,172
 
 
 
1,989
 
 
 
1,943
 



Total
      operating revenues

 
 
23,766
 
 
 
22,935
 
 
 
22,563
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Expenses

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Aircraft
      fuel

 
 
9,014
 
 
 
6,670
 
 
 
6,402
 



Wages,
      salaries and benefits

 
 
6,655
 
 
 
6,770
 
 
 
6,813
 



Other
      rentals and landing fees

 
 
1,298
 
 
 
1,278
 
 
 
1,283
 



Depreciation
      and amortization

 
 
1,207
 
 
 
1,202
 
 
 
1,157
 



Maintenance,
      materials and repairs

 
 
1,237
 
 
 
1,057
 
 
 
971
 



Commissions,
      booking fees and credit card expense

 
 
997
 
 
 
1,028
 
 
 
1,076
 



Aircraft
      rentals

 
 
492
 
 
 
591
 
 
 
606
 



Food
      service

 
 
518
 
 
 
534
 
 
 
508
 



Special
      charges

 
 
1,213
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
-
 



Other
      operating expenses

 
 
3,024
 
 
 
2,777
 
 
 
2,687
 



Total
      operating expenses

 
 
25,655
 
 
 
21,970
 
 
 
21,503
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      Income (Loss)

 
 
(1,889
)
 
 
965
 
 
 
1,060
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      Income (Expense)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Interest
      income

 
 
181
 
 
 
337
 
 
 
279
 



Interest
      expense

 
 
(756
)
 
 
(914
)
 
 
(1,030
)



Interest
      capitalized

 
 
33
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
29
 



Miscellaneous
      – net

 
 
360
 
 
 
96
 
 
 
(107
)


 
      
 
 
(182
)
 
 
(461
)
 
 
(829
)



 
Income
      (Loss) Before Income Taxes

 
 
(2,071
)
 
 
504
 
 
 
231
 



Income
      tax

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Net
      Earnings (Loss)

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
504
 
 
$
231
 


 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Earnings
      (Loss) Per Share

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Basic

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
2.06
 
 
$
1.13
 



Diluted

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
1.78
 
 
$
0.98
 














The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION




CONSOLIDATED BALANCE
      SHEETS 










(in
      millions, except shares and par value)

 


 
      
 
 
 


 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Assets

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Current
      Assets

 
 
 
 
 
 



Cash

 
$
191
 
 
$
148
 



Short-term
      investments

 
 
2,916
 
 
 
4,387
 



Restricted
      cash and short-term investments

 
 
459
 
 
 
428
 



Receivables,
      less allowance for uncollectible
accounts
      (2008 - $49; 2007 - $41)

 
 
811
 
 
 
1,027
 



Inventories,
      less allowance for obsolescence
(2008
      - $488; 2007 - $424)

 
 
525
 
 
 
601
 



Fuel
      derivative contracts

 
 
188
 
 
 
416
 



Fuel
      derivative collateral deposits

 
 
575
 
 
 
-
 



Other
      current assets

 
 
270
 
 
 
222
 



Total
      current assets

 
 
5,935
 
 
 
7,229
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equipment
      and Property

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Flight
      equipment, at cost

 
 
19,601
 
 
 
23,006
 



Less
      accumulated depreciation

 
 
7,147
 
 
 
9,029
 


 
      
 
 
12,454
 
 
 
13,977
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Purchase
      deposits for flight equipment

 
 
671
 
 
 
241
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      equipment and property, at cost

 
 
5,132
 
 
 
5,238
 



Less
      accumulated depreciation

 
 
2,762
 
 
 
2,825
 


 
      
 
 
2,370
 
 
 
2,413
 


 
      
 
 
15,495
 
 
 
16,631
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equipment
      and Property Under Capital Leases

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Flight
      equipment

 
 
561
 
 
 
1,698
 



Other
      equipment and property

 
 
215
 
 
 
217
 


 
      
 
 
776
 
 
 
1,915
 



Less
      accumulated amortization

 
 
536
 
 
 
1,152
 


 
      
 
 
240
 
 
 
763
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      Assets

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Route
      acquisition costs, slots and airport operating and gate lease rights, less
      accumulated amortization (2008 - $416; 2007 -
$389)

 
 
1,109
 
 
 
1,156
 



Other
      assets

 
 
2,396
 
 
 
2,792
 


 
      
 
 
3,505
 
 
 
3,948
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      Assets

 
$
25,175
 
 
$
28,571
 











The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED
BALANCE SHEETS






(in
      millions, except shares and par value)

 


 
      
 
 
 


 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Liabilities
      and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Current
      Liabilities

 
 
 
 
 
 



Accounts
      payable

 
$
952
 
 
$
1,182
 



Accrued
      salaries and wages

 
 
519
 
 
 
559
 



Fuel
      derivative liability

 
 
716
 
 
 
-
 



Accrued
      liabilities

 
 
1,523
 
 
 
1,708
 



Air
      traffic liability

 
 
3,708
 
 
 
3,985
 



Current
      maturities of long-term debt

 
 
1,849
 
 
 
902
 



Current
      obligations under capital leases

 
 
107
 
 
 
147
 



Total
      current liabilities

 
 
9,374
 
 
 
8,483
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Long-Term
      Debt, Less Current Maturities

 
 
8,419
 
 
 
9,413
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Obligations
      Under Capital Leases,
Less
      Current Obligations

 
 
582
 
 
 
680
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      Liabilities and Credits

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Deferred
      gains

 
 
297
 
 
 
320
 



Pension
      and postretirement benefits

 
 
6,614
 
 
 
3,620
 



Other
      liabilities and deferred credits

 
 
2,824
 
 
 
3,398
 


 
      
 
 
9,735
 
 
 
7,338
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Commitments
      and Contingencies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Stockholders'
      Equity (Deficit)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Preferred
      stock - 20,000,000 shares authorized; None issued

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Common
      stock - $1 par value; 750,000,000 shares authorized;
shares
      issued: 2008 - 284,888,845; 2007 - 255,338,431

 
 
285
 
 
 
255
 



Additional
      paid-in capital

 
 
3,785
 
 
 
3,489
 



Treasury
      shares at cost: 2008 and 2007 - 5,940,399

 
 
(367
)
 
 
(367
)



Accumulated
      other comprehensive income (loss)

 
 
(3,177
)
 
 
670
 



Accumulated
      deficit

 
 
(3,461
)
 
 
(1,390
)


 
      
 
 
(2,935
)
 
 
2,657
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)

 
$
25,175
 
 
$
28,571
 










The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS






(in
      millions)

 


 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



Cash
      Flow from Operating Activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      earnings (loss)

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
504
 
 
$
231
 



Adjustments
      to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided (used) by operating
      activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Depreciation

 
 
1,055
 
 
 
1,036
 
 
 
1,022
 



Amortization

 
 
152
 
 
 
166
 
 
 
135
 



Equity
      based stock compensation

 
 
53
 
 
 
133
 
 
 
142
 



Restructuring
      and settlement charges

 
 
1,317
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
-
 



Gain
      on sale of investments/subsidiaries

 
 
(432
)
 
 
(138
)
 
 
(13
)



Redemption
      payments under operating leases for special facility revenue
      bonds

 
 
(188
)
 
 
(100
)
 
 
(28
)



Change
      in assets and liabilities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Decrease
      (increase) in receivables

 
 
217
 
 
 
(41
)
 
 
3
 



Decrease
      (increase) in inventories

 
 
5
 
 
 
(128
)
 
 
(7
)



Decrease
      (increase) in derivative collateral and unwound derivative
      contracts

 
 
(940
)
 
 
164
 
 
 
 -
 



Increase
      (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued liabilities

 
 
(421
)
 
 
248
 
 
 
(130
)



Increase
      (decrease) in air traffic liability

 
 
(277
)
 
 
203
 
 
 
168
 



Increase
      (decrease) in other liabilities and deferred credits

 
 
178
 
 
 
(135
)
 
 
382
 



Other,
      net

 
 
(42
)
 
 
(40
)
 
 
34
 



     Net
      cash provided by (used in) operating activities

 
 
(1,394
)
 
 
1,935
 
 
 
1,939
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Cash
      Flow from Investing Activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Capital
      expenditures, including purchase deposits on flight
    equipment

 
 
(876
)
 
 
(714
)
 
 
(530
)



Net
      decrease (increase) in short-term investments

 
 
1,471
 
 
 
207
 
 
 
(918
)



Net
      decrease (increase) in restricted cash and short-term
      investments

 
 
(31
)
 
 
40
 
 
 
42
 



Proceeds
      from sale of equipment, property and
    investments/subsidiaries

 
 
480
 
 
 
228
 
 
 
49
 



Other

 
 
11
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
(8
)



     Net
      cash provided by (used in) investing activities

 
 
1,055
 
 
 
(234
)
 
 
(1,365
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Cash
      Flow from Financing Activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Payments
      on long-term debt and capital lease obligations

 
 
(1,092
)
 
 
(2,321
)
 
 
(1,366
)



Proceeds
      from:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Issuance
      of common stock, net of issuance costs

 
 
294
 
 
 
497
 
 
 
400
 



Reimbursement
      from construction reserve account

 
 
-
 
 
 
59
 
 
 
145
 



Exercise
      of stock options

 
 
1
 
 
 
90
 
 
 
230
 



Issuance
      of long-term debt

 
 
825
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Sale
      leaseback transactions

 
 
354
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



     Net
      cash provided by (used in) financing activities

 
 
382
 
 
 
(1,675
)
 
 
(591
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      increase (decrease) in cash

 
 
43
 
 
 
27
 
 
 
(17
)



Cash
      at beginning of year

 
 
148
 
 
 
121
 
 
 
138
 



Cash
      at end of year

 
$
191
 
 
$
148
 
 
$
121
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 






The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 





 

   
AMR
CORPORATION





CONSOLIDATED
      STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
(DEFICIT)








(in
      millions, except share amounts)








 
      
 

 
 
Common
Stock

 
 

 
Additional
Paid-in
Capital

 
 

 
 
Treasury
Stock

 
 

Accumulated
      Other Comprehensive Income (loss)

 
 

 
 
Accumulated
      Deficit

 
 

 
 
 
Total

 



Balance
      at January 1, 2006

 
$
195
 
 
$
2,258
 
 
$
(779
)
 
$
(979
)
 
$
(2,125
)
 
$
(1,430
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      earnings

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
231
 
 
 
231
 



Pension,
      retiree medical and other liability

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
748
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
748
 



Net
      changes in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(62
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(62
)



Total
      comprehensive income

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
917
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reclassification
      and amortization of stock compensation plans

 
 
-
 
 
 
275
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
275
 



Issuance
      of 15,002,091 shares

 
 
15
 
 
 
385
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
400
 



Issuance
      of 24,489,980 shares to employees pursuant to stock option and deferred
      stock incentive plans

 
 
  18
 
 
 
(200
)
 
 
  412
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  230
 



Adjustment
      resulting from adoption of SFAS 158

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(998
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(998
)



Balance
      at December 31, 2006

 
 
228
 
 
 
2,718
 
 
 
(367
)
 
 
(1,291
)
 
 
(1,894
)
 
 
(606
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      earnings

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
504
 
 
 
504
 



Pension,
      retiree medical and other liability

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1,744
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 1,744
 



Net
      changes in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 223
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 223
 



Unrealized
      loss on investments

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(6
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(6
)



           Total
      comprehensive income

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2,465
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reclassification
      and amortization of stock compensation plans

 
 
-
 
 
 
211
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
211
 



Issuance
      of 13,000,000 shares

 
 
13
 
 
 
484
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
497
 



Issuance
      of 14,173,610 shares to employees pursuant to stock option and deferred
      stock incentive plans

 
 
   14
 
 
 
   76
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   90
 



Balance
      at December 31, 2007

 
 
255
 
 
 
3,489
 
 
 
(367
)
 
 
670
 
 
 
(1,390
)
 
 
2,657
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      loss

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(2,071
)
 
 
(2,071
)



Pension,
      retiree medical and other liability

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(2,724
)
 
 
 -
 
 
 
(2,724
)



Net
      changes in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(1,116
)
 
 
 -
 
 
 
(1,116
)



Unrealized
      loss on investments

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(7
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(7
)



           Total
      comprehensive loss

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5,918
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reclassification
      and amortization of stock compensation plans

 
 
-
 
 
 
30
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
30
 



Issuance
      of 27,057,554 shares

 
 
27
 
 
 
267
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
294
 



Issuance
      of 2,492,860 shares to employees pursuant to stock option and deferred
      stock incentive plans

 
 
   3
 
 
 
(1
)
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   2
 



Balance
      at December 31, 2008

 
$
285
 
 
$
3,785
 
 
$
(367
)
 
$
(3,177
)
 
$
(3,461
)
 
$
(2,935
)




 
The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.



 



 






 






NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS   
1.         Summary of Accounting
Policies

Basis of
Presentation   The accompanying
consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2008 and for the three
years ended December 31, 2008 include the accounts of AMR Corporation (AMR or
the Company) and its wholly owned subsidiaries, including (i) its principal
subsidiary American Airlines, Inc. (American) and (ii) its regional airline
subsidiary, AMR Eagle Holding Corporation and its primary subsidiaries, American
Eagle Airlines, Inc. and Executive Airlines, Inc. (collectively, AMR
Eagle).  The consolidated financial statements as of and for the years
ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 include the accounts of the Company and
its wholly owned subsidiaries as well as variable interest entities for which
the Company is the primary beneficiary.  All significant intercompany
transactions have been eliminated.

New Accounting
Pronouncements   The Company has adopted Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 “Fair Value Measurements” (SFAS 157) as
it applies to financial assets and liabilities effective January 1,
2008.  The Company's routes are not yet subject to SFAS 157. SFAS 157
defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value under
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and enhances disclosures about
fair value measurements. Fair value is defined under SFAS 157 as the exchange
price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an
exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the
measurement date.  The principal impact to the Company was to require
the Company to expand its disclosure regarding its derivative instruments and to
consider credit risk as a part of the calculation of the fair value of
derivatives, which was not significant after consideration of
collateral.

In March
of 2008, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 161,
“Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, an amendment
of FASB Statement No. 133” (SFAS 161).  SFAS 161 requires entities to
provide greater transparency about how and why the entity uses derivative
instruments, how the instruments and related hedged items are accounted for
under SFAS 133, and how the instruments and related hedged items affect the
financial position, results of operations, and cash flows of the
entity.  The Company adopted SFAS 161 as of December 31,
2008.  The principal impact to the Company was to require the
expansion of its disclosure regarding its derivative instruments.

In
May 2008, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) affirmed the
consensus of FASB Staff Position APB 14-1 (FSP APB 14-1), “Accounting for
Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion
(Including Partial Cash Settlement),” which applies to all convertible debt
instruments that have a ‘‘net settlement feature’’, which means that such
convertible debt instruments, by their terms, may be settled either wholly or
partially in cash upon conversion. FSP APB 14-1 requires issuers of
convertible debt instruments that may be settled wholly or partially in cash
upon conversion to separately account for the liability and equity components in
a manner reflective of the issuers’ nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. FSP APB
14-1 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2008 and interim periods within those fiscal
years.  Early adoption is not permitted and retroactive application to
all periods presented is required.  The adoption of FSP APB 14-1 will
affect the historical accounting for the 4.25 Notes and the 4.50 Notes, and will
result in increased interest expense of approximately $5 million in
2009.  Balance sheet impact is not significant.

Use of
Estimates   The preparation of financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the
accompanying consolidated financial statements and accompanying
notes.  Actual results could differ from those estimates.

Restricted Cash and Short-term
Investments   The Company has restricted cash and
short-term investments related primarily to collateral held to support projected
workers’ compensation obligations.

Inventories   Spare
parts, materials and supplies relating to flight equipment are carried at
average acquisition cost and are expensed when used in
operations.  Allowances for obsolescence are provided - over the
estimated useful life of the related aircraft and engines - for spare parts
expected to be on hand at the date aircraft are retired from service. Allowances
are also provided for spare parts currently identified as excess and
obsolete.  These allowances are based on management estimates, which
are subject to change.

Maintenance and Repair
Costs   Maintenance and repair costs for owned and leased
flight equipment are charged to operating expense as incurred, except costs
incurred for maintenance and repair under flight hour maintenance contract
agreements, which are accrued based on contractual terms when an obligation
exists.


 








 



1.         Summary of Accounting
Policies (Continued)

Intangible
Assets   Route acquisition costs and airport operating and
gate lease rights represent the purchase price attributable to route authorities
(including international airport take-off and landing slots), domestic airport
take-off and landing slots and airport gate leasehold rights
acquired.  Indefinite-lived intangible assets (route acquisition costs
and international slots and related international take-off and landing slots)
are tested for impairment annually on December 31, rather than amortized, in
accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142, “Goodwill
and Other Intangible Assets” (SFAS 142).  Airport operating and gate
lease rights are being amortized on a straight-line basis over 25 years to a
zero residual value.

Statements of Cash
Flows   Short-term investments, without regard to
remaining maturity at acquisition, are not considered as cash equivalents for
purposes of the statements of cash flows.

Measurement of Asset
Impairments   In accordance with Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of
Long-Lived Assets” (SFAS 144), the Company records impairment charges on
long-lived assets used in operations when events and circumstances indicate that
the assets may be impaired. An asset or group of assets is considered impaired
when the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by the asset is less
than the carrying amount of the asset and the net book value of the asset
exceeds its estimated fair value.  In making these determinations, the
Company uses certain assumptions, including, but not limited to: (i) estimated
fair value of the assets; and (ii) estimated future cash flows expected to be
generated by these assets, which are based on additional assumptions such as
asset utilization, length of service the asset will be used in the Company’s
operations and estimated salvage values.

Equipment and
Property   The provision for depreciation of operating
equipment and property is computed on the straight-line method applied to each
unit of property, except that major rotable parts, avionics and assemblies are
depreciated on a group basis.  The depreciable lives used for the
principal depreciable asset classifications are:



 
      

 
Depreciable
      Life



 
      
 
      



American
      jet aircraft and engines


20
      - 30 years




Other
      regional aircraft and engines


16
      - 20 years




Major
      rotable parts, avionics and assemblies


Life
      of equipment to which applicable




Improvements
      to leased flight equipment


Lesser
      of lease term or expected useful life




Buildings
      and improvements (principally on
leased
      land)


5 -
      30 years or term of lease, including estimated renewal options when
      renewal is economically compelled at key airports




Furniture,
      fixtures and other equipment


3 -
      10 years




Capitalized
      software


3 -
      10 years





Residual
values for aircraft, engines, major rotable parts, avionics and assemblies are
generally five to ten percent, except when guaranteed by a third party for a
different amount.

Equipment
and property under capital leases are amortized over the term of the leases or,
in the case of certain aircraft, over their expected useful
lives.  Lease terms vary but are generally ten to 25 years for
aircraft and seven to 40 years for other leased equipment and
property.

Regional
Affiliates   Revenue from ticket sales is generally
recognized when service is provided. Regional Affiliates revenues for flights
connecting to American flights are based on industry standard proration
agreements.

Passenger
Revenue    Passenger ticket sales
are initially recorded as a component of Air traffic
liability.  Revenue derived from ticket sales is recognized at the
time service is provided.  However, due to various factors, including
the complex pricing structure and interline agreements throughout the industry,
certain amounts are recognized in revenue using estimates regarding both the
timing of the revenue recognition and the amount of revenue to be recognized,
including breakage. These estimates are generally based upon the evaluation of
historical trends, including the use of regression analysis and other methods to
model the outcome of future events based on the Company’s historical experience,
and are recorded at the scheduled time of departure.


 



 






 



1.         Summary of Accounting
Policies (Continued)

Various
taxes and fees assessed on the sale of tickets to end customers are collected by
the Company as an agent and remitted to taxing authorities. These taxes and fees
have been presented on a net basis in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations and recorded as a liability until remitted to the appropriate taxing
authority.

Beginning
in the first quarter of 2008, AMR reclassified revenues associated with the
marketing component of AAdvantage program mileage sales from Passenger revenue
to Other revenue.  As a result of this change, approximately $584
million, $571 million, $557 million, $451 million, $409 million and $387 million
of revenue was reclassified from Passenger revenue to Other revenue for the
years ended December 31, 2007, 2006, 2005, 2004, 2003 and 2002 respectively, to
conform to the current presentation.

Frequent Flyer
Program   The estimated incremental cost of providing free
travel awards is accrued for mileage credits earned by using American’s service
that are expected to be redeemed in the future. American also accrues a frequent
flyer liability for the mileage credits that are expected to be used for travel
on participating airlines based on historical usage patterns and contractual
rates. American sells mileage credits and related services to companies
participating in its frequent flyer program.  The portion of the
revenue related to the sale of mileage credits, representing the revenue for air
transportation sold, is valued at fair value and is deferred and amortized over
28 months, which approximates the expected period over which the mileage credits
are used.  Breakage of sold miles is recognized over the estimated
period of usage.  The remaining portion of the revenue, representing
the marketing services sold and administrative costs associated with operating
the AAdvantage program, is recognized upon sale as a component of other
revenues, as the related services have been provided.  The Company’s
total liability for future AAdvantage award redemptions for free, discounted or
upgraded travel on American, American Eagle or participating airlines as well as
unrecognized revenue from selling AAdvantage miles was approximately $1.7
billion (and is recorded as a component of Air traffic liability on the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets) at December 31, 2008 and $1.6 billion
as of December 31, 2007.

Income
Taxes   The Company generally believes that the positions
taken on previously filed income tax returns are more likely than not to be
sustained by the taxing authorities.  The Company has recorded income
tax and related interest liabilities where the Company believes its position may
not be sustained or where the full income tax benefit will not be
recognized.  In accordance with the standards of Financial Accounting
Standards Board Interpretation No. 48 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
Taxes - an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109” (FIN 48),
the effects of potential income tax benefits resulting from the Company’s
unrecognized tax positions are not reflected in the tax balances of the
financial statements.  Recognized and unrecognized tax positions are
reviewed and adjusted as events occur that affect the Company’s judgment about
the recognizability of income tax benefits, such as lapsing of applicable
statutes of limitations, conclusion of tax audits, release of administrative
guidance, or rendering of a court decision affecting a particular tax
position.

Advertising
Costs   The Company expenses on a straight-line basis the
costs of advertising as incurred throughout the year.  Advertising
expense was $153 million, $162 million and $154 million for the years ended
December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

2.         Special Charges and
Restructuring Activities

As a result of the revenue
environment, high fuel prices and the Company’s restructuring activities,
including its capacity reductions, the Company has recorded a number of charges
during the last few years.  In May 2008, the Company announced
capacity reductions due to unprecedented high fuel costs at that time and the
other challenges facing the industry.  In connection with these
capacity reductions, the Company incurred special charges related to aircraft,
employee reductions and certain other charges.



 



 






 



2.           Special Charges and
Restructuring Activities (Continued)

Aircraft
Charges
In
accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting
for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets” (SFAS 144), the Company
records impairment charges on long-lived assets used in operations when events
and circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired.  Assets or
groups of assets are considered impaired when the undiscounted cash flows
estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amount of
those assets and the net book value of the assets exceeds their estimated fair
value. In connection with the May 2008 capacity reduction announcement, the
Company concluded that a triggering event had occurred requiring that fixed
assets be tested for impairment.  As a result of this test, the
Company concluded the carrying values of its McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and the
Embraer RJ-135 aircraft fleets were no longer recoverable. Consequently, during
the second quarter of 2008, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $1.1
billion to write these and certain related long-lived assets down to their
estimated fair values. No portion of the impairment charge will result in future
cash expenditures.  All other fleet types were tested for impairment
but were concluded to be recoverable with projected undiscounted cash flows or
these fleet types had fair values at levels above current carrying
value.  Included in the charge for the Embraer RJ-135 fleet were write
downs on 29 aircraft, of which 19 were considered held for sale as of December
31, 2008.  The McDonnell Douglas MD-80 aircraft are being depreciated
over their remaining useful lives averaging approximately five
years.

In
determining the asset recoverability, management estimated the undiscounted
future cash flows utilizing models used by the Company in making fleet and
scheduling decisions.  In determining fair market value, the Company
utilized recent external appraisals of its fleets, a published aircraft pricing
survey and recent transactions involving sales of similar aircraft, adjusted
based on estimates of maintenance status and to consider the impact of recent
industry events on these values.  As a result of the write down of
these aircraft to fair value, as well as the acceleration of the retirement
dates, depreciation expense related to these assets is expected to decrease by
approximately $141 million on an annualized basis.

As part
of these capacity reductions, the Company expects to ground over the next twelve
months its leased Airbus A300 aircraft prior to lease expiration.  As
of December 31, 2008, the Company estimates that it will incur approximately
$130 million in net present value of future lease payments and lease return
costs related to the grounding of the leased A300 fleet, of which $33 million
was incurred in 2008 as four aircraft were removed from service.  The
remaining charges will be incurred over the next three quarters as the aircraft
are removed from service. These expected future charges do not yet consider
potential sublease contracts or similar arrangements with respect to the leased
Airbus 300 aircraft, which could offset a portion of the charges, as significant
contract amendments are required in order to execute any sublease
agreements.  The Company estimates that virtually all of these charges
will result in future cash expenditures.

In the
fourth quarter of 2007, the Company permanently grounded and held for disposal
24 McDonnell Douglas MD-80 airframes and certain other equipment, all of which
had previously been in temporary storage. Of these 24 aircraft, 12 are owned by
the Company, seven are accounted for as capital leases and five are accounted
for as operating leases. Primarily as a result of the retirement, the Company
incurred a charge of $63 million, included in Special
charges expenses in the consolidated statement of operations, to accrue
future lease commitments and write-down the aircraft frames to their fair
values. In determining the fair values of these aircraft, the Company considered
recent transactions involving inventory for the aircraft.

Employee
Charges
In
conjunction with the capacity reductions announced in May 2008, the Company
reduced its workforce commensurate with the announced system-wide capacity
reductions.  This reduction in workforce was accomplished through
various measures, including voluntary programs, part-time work schedules,
furloughs in accordance with collective bargaining agreements, and other
reductions.  As a result of this reduction in workforce, the Company
incurred employee charges of approximately $71 million for severance related
costs in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 112,
“Employers Accounting for Postemployment Benefits” (SFAS 112), based on probable
expectations of involuntary terminations.  The Company
does not expect remaining charges related to the reduction in workforce to be
significant.  



 



 






 



2.           Special Charges and
Restructuring Activities (Continued)

The
following table summarizes the components of the Company’s special charges, the
remaining accruals for these charges and the capacity reduction related charges
(in millions) as of December 31, 2008:









 
      
 

Aircraft
      Charges

 
 

Facility
      Exit Costs

 
 

Employee
      Charges

 
 



Other

 
 



Total

 
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at January 1, 2006

 
 
152
 
 
 
36
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
188
 
 
 
 



Adjustments

 
 
(3
)
 
 
(16
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(19
)
 
 
 



Payments

 
 
(21
)
 
 
(1
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(22
)
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at December 31, 2006

 
$
128
 
 
$
19
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
147
 
 
 
 



Restructuring
      charges

 
 
63
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
 



Non-cash
      charges

 
 
(53
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(53
)
 
 
 



Payments

 
 
(12
)
 
 
(1
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(13
)
 
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at December 31, 2007

 
$
126
 
 
$
18
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
144
 
 
 
 
 



Capacity
      reduction charges

 
 
1,117
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
71
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
1,213
 
 
 
 
 



Non-cash
      charges

 
 
(1,103
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(25
)
 
 
(1,128
)
 
 
 
 



Adjustments

 
 
1
 
 
 
(2
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(1
)
 
 
 
 



Payments

 
 
(31
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(55
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(86
)
 
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at December 31, 2008

 
$
110
 
 
$
16
 
 
$
16
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
142
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








Cash
outlays related to the accruals for aircraft charges and facility exit costs
will occur through 2017 and 2018, respectively. 

Other
On
September 22, 2001, the Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act
(the Stabilization Act) was signed into law.  The Stabilization Act
provides that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, liability for all
claims, whether compensatory or punitive, arising from the terrorist attacks of
September 11, 2001 (the Terrorist Attacks), against any air carrier shall not
exceed the liability coverage maintained by the air carrier.  Based
upon estimates provided by the Company’s insurance providers, the Company
initially recorded a liability of approximately $2.3 billion for claims arising
from the Terrorist Attacks, after considering the liability protections provided
for by the Stabilization Act.  The balance, recorded in the
accompanying consolidated balance sheet, was $1.7 billion and $1.8 billion at
December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.

In 2008,
the Company finalized the liability associated with flight 587.  A
previously recorded liability and related insurance receivable were reduced as a
result of the settlement by approximately $381 million.

3.         Investments

Short-term
investments consisted of (in millions):





 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Overnight
      investments and time deposits

 
$
1,574
 
 
$
488
 



Corporate
      and bank notes

 
 
1,016
 
 
 
3,781
 



U.
      S. government agency notes

 
 
322
 
 
 
17
 



Other

 
 
4
 
 
 
101
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
2,916
 
 
$
4,387
 







 



 






 



3.         Investments
(Continued)

Short-term
investments at December 31, 2008, by contractual maturity included (in
millions):






Due
      in one year or less

 
$
2,916
 



Due
      between one year and three years

 
 
-
 



Due
      after three years

 
 
-
 


 
      
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
2,916
 





All
short-term investments are classified as available-for-sale and stated at fair
value.  Unrealized gains and losses are reflected as a component of
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).

The
Company has adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 “Fair
Value Measurements” (SFAS 157) as it applies to financial assets and liabilities
effective January 1, 2008.  SFAS 157 defines fair value,
establishes a framework for measuring fair value under generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) and enhances disclosures about fair value
measurements.

SFAS 157
defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or
paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most
advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between
market participants on the measurement date. Under SFAS 157, AMR utilizes
several valuation techniques in order to assess the fair value of the Company’s
financial assets and liabilities.  The Company’s fuel derivative
contracts, which primarily consist of commodity options and collars, are valued
using energy and commodity market data which is derived by combining raw inputs
with quantitative models and processes to generate forward curves and
volatilities.  The Company’s short-term investments primarily utilize
broker quotes in a non-active market for valuation of these
securities.

SFAS 157
also establishes a fair value hierarchy which requires an entity to maximize the
use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when
measuring fair value. The standard describes three levels of inputs that may be
used to measure fair value:

Level 1 - Quoted prices in
active markets for identical assets or liabilities.

Level 2 - Observable inputs
other than Level 1 prices such as quoted prices for similar assets or
liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other inputs that
are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for
substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.  The
Company’s short-term investments primarily utilize broker quotes in a non-active
market for valuation of these securities.  The Company’s fuel
derivative contracts, which primarily consist of commodity options and collars,
are valued using energy and commodity market data which is derived by combining
raw inputs with quantitative models and processes to generate forward curves and
volatilities.

Level 3 - Unobservable inputs
that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to
the fair value of the assets or liabilities.

The
Company utilizes the market approach to measure fair value for its financial
assets and liabilities.  The market approach uses prices and other
relevant information generated by market transactions involving identical or
comparable assets or liabilities.


 



 






 



3.           Investments
(Continued)
 
Assets
and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis are summarized
below:







(in
      millions)

 

Fair Value Measurements as of December 31,
      2008

 



Description

 

Total

 
 

Level
      1

 
 

Level
      2

 
 

Level
      3

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Short
      term investments 1

 
$
2,916
 
 
$
1,411
 
 
$
1,505
 
 
 
-
 



Restricted
      cash and short-term investments 1

 
 
459
 
 
 
453
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
-
 



Fuel
      derivative contracts, net liability 1

 
 
(528
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(528
)
 
 
-
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total

 
$
2,847
 
 
$
1,864
 
 
$
983
 
 
$
-
 




1
Unrealized gains or losses on short-term investments, restricted cash and
short-term investments and derivatives designated as hedges are recorded in
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) at each measurement
date.

In 2007,
the Company sold its interests in ARINC, Incorporated (ARINC), a military and
aviation communications company, previously recorded as a component of other
assets.  The Company received $192 million in proceeds for its
interest in ARINC, $138 million of which was recognized as a
gain.  The gain on the sale of the Company’s interest in ARINC is
included in Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations. 

4.         Commitments, Contingencies
and Guarantees

During
2008, the Company continued its fleet renewal strategy as it entered into
amendments to its purchase agreement with the Boeing Company.  Giving
effect to the amendments and considering the impact of delays caused by the
recent machinist strike at Boeing, the Company is now committed to take delivery
of a total of 29 737-800 aircraft in 2009, 39 737-800 aircraft in 2010 and eight
737-800 aircraft in 2011.  In addition to these aircraft, the Company
has firm commitments for eleven 737-800 aircraft and seven Boeing 777 aircraft
scheduled to be delivered in 2013 - 2016. Under the Boeing 737-800 and Boeing
777-200 aircraft purchase agreements, payments for the related aircraft purchase
commitments will be approximately $1.0 billion in 2009, $1.1 billion in 2010,
$355 million in 2011, $218 million in 2012, $417 million in 2013 and $584
million for 2014 and beyond. These amounts are net of purchase deposits
currently held by the manufacturer.  Any incremental firm aircraft
orders will increase the Company’s commitments.

American
has granted Boeing a security interest in American’s purchase deposits with
Boeing.  The Company’s purchase deposits totaled $671 million and $239
million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.

In
October of 2008, the Company entered into a sale leaseback agreement for 20 of
the 76 Boeing 737-800 aircraft to be delivered in 2009 - 2011.  Such
financing is subject to certain terms and conditions including a minimum
liquidity requirement.  In addition, the Company had previously arranged
for backstop financing which covered a significant portion of the remaining 2009
- - 2011 Boeing 737-800 aircraft deliveries. 

On
December 18, 2007, the European Commission issued a Statement of Objection
(“SO”) against 26 airlines, including the Company.  The SO alleges
that these carriers participated in a conspiracy to set surcharges on cargo
shipments in violation of EU law.  The SO states that, in the event
that the allegations in the SO are affirmed, the Commission will impose fines
against the Company.  The Company intends to vigorously contest the
allegations and findings in the SO under EU laws, and it intends to cooperate
fully with all other pending investigations.  Based on the information
to date, the Company has not recorded any reserve for this exposure for the year
ended December 31, 2008.  In the event that the SO is affirmed or
other investigations uncover violations of the U.S. antitrust laws or the
competition laws of some other jurisdiction, or if the Company were named and
found liable in any litigation based on these allegations, such findings and
related legal proceedings could have a material adverse impact on the
Company. 

The
Company has contracts related to facility construction or improvement projects,
primarily at airport locations. The contractual obligations related to these
projects totaled approximately $57 million as of December 31,
2008.  The Company expects to make payments of $45 million and $6
million in 2009 and 2010, respectively.  In addition, the Company has
an information technology support related contract that requires minimum annual
payments of $150 million through 2013.


 



 






 



4.        Commitments,
Contingencies and Guarantees (Continued)

American
has capacity purchase agreements with two regional airlines, Chautauqua
Airlines, Inc. (Chautauqua) and Trans States Airlines, Inc. (collectively the
AmericanConnection® carriers) to provide Embraer EMB-140/145 regional jet
services to certain markets under the brand
“AmericanConnection”.  Under these arrangements, the Company pays the
AmericanConnection® carriers a fee per block hour to operate the
aircraft.  The block hour fees are designed to cover the
AmericanConnection® carriers’ fully allocated costs plus a
margin.  Assumptions for certain costs such as fuel, landing fees,
insurance, and aircraft ownership are trued up to actual values on a pass
through basis. In consideration for these payments, the Company retains all
passenger and other revenues resulting from the operation of the
AmericanConnection® regional jets.  Minimum payments under the
contracts are $68 million in 2009, $120 million over the years 2010 and 2011 and
$17 million in 2012 and 2013.  In addition, if the Company terminates
the Chautauqua contract without cause, Chautauqua has the right to put its 15
Embraer aircraft to the Company.  If this were to happen, the Company
would take possession of the aircraft and become liable for lease obligations
totaling approximately $21 million per year with lease expirations in 2018 and
2019.

The
Company is a party to many routine contracts in which it provides general
indemnities in the normal course of business to third parties for various risks.
The Company is not able to estimate the potential amount of any liability
resulting from the indemnities. These indemnities are discussed in the following
paragraphs.

The
Company’s loan agreements and other London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)-based
financing transactions (including certain leveraged aircraft leases) generally
obligate the Company to reimburse the applicable lender for incremental costs
due to a change in law that imposes (i) any reserve or special deposit
requirement against assets of, deposits with or credit extended by such lender
related to the loan, (ii) any tax, duty or other charge with respect to the loan
(except standard income tax) or (iii) capital adequacy requirements. In
addition, the Company’s loan agreements, derivative contracts and other
financing arrangements typically contain a withholding tax provision that
requires the Company to pay additional amounts to the applicable lender or other
financing party, generally if withholding taxes are imposed on such lender or
other financing party as a result of a change in the applicable tax
law.

These
increased cost and withholding tax provisions continue for the entire term of
the applicable transaction, and there is no limitation on the maximum additional
amounts the Company could be obligated to pay under such
provisions.  Any failure to pay amounts due under such provisions
generally would trigger an event of default and, in a secured financing
transaction, would entitle the lender to foreclose upon the collateral to
realize the amount due.

In
certain transactions, including certain aircraft financing leases and loans and
derivative transactions, the lessors, lenders and/or other parties have rights
to terminate the transaction based on changes in foreign tax law, illegality or
certain other events or circumstances.  In such a case, the Company
may be required to make a lump sum payment to terminate the relevant
transaction.

In its
aircraft financing agreements, the Company generally indemnifies the financing
parties, trustees acting on their behalf and other relevant parties against
liabilities (including certain taxes) resulting from the financing, manufacture,
design, ownership, operation and maintenance of the aircraft regardless of
whether these liabilities  (or taxes) relate to the negligence of the
indemnified parties.

The
Company has general indemnity clauses in many of its airport and other real
estate leases where the Company as lessee indemnifies the lessor (and related
parties) against liabilities related to the Company’s use of the leased
property.  Generally, these indemnifications cover liabilities
resulting from the negligence of the indemnified parties, but not liabilities
resulting from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnified
parties.  In addition, the Company provides environmental indemnities
in many of these leases for contamination related to the Company’s use of the
leased property.

Under
certain contracts with third parties, the Company indemnifies the third party
against legal liability arising out of an action by the third party, or certain
other parties. The terms of these contracts vary and the potential exposure
under these indemnities cannot be determined. Generally, the Company has
liability insurance protecting the Company for the obligations it has undertaken
under these indemnities.



 



 






 



4.         Commitments, Contingencies
and Guarantees (Continued)

AMR and
American have event risk covenants in approximately $1.2 billion of indebtedness
and operating leases as of December 31, 2008.  These covenants permit
the holders of such obligations to receive a higher rate of return (between 100
and 650 basis points above the stated rate) if a designated event, as defined,
should occur and the credit ratings of such obligations are downgraded below
certain levels within a certain period of time.  No designated event,
as defined, had occurred as of December 31, 2008.

The
Company is involved in certain claims and litigation related to its operations.
In the opinion of management, liabilities, if any, arising from these claims and
litigation will not have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated
financial position, results of operations, or cash flows, after consideration of
available insurance.

5.         Leases

AMR's
subsidiaries lease various types of equipment and property, primarily aircraft
and airport facilities.  The future minimum lease payments required
under capital leases, together with the present value of such payments, and
future minimum lease payments required under operating leases that have initial
or remaining non-cancelable lease terms in excess of one year as of December 31,
2008, were (in millions):






 
Year
      Ending December 31,

 

Capital
Leases

 
 

Operating
Leases

 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2009

 
$
182
 
 
$
998
 
 
 
 



2010

 
 
143
 
 
 
932
 
 
 
 



2011

 
 
146
 
 
 
922
 
 
 
 



2012

 
 
97
 
 
 
739
 
 
 
 



2013

 
 
83
 
 
 
652
 
 
 
 



2014
      and thereafter

 
 
476
 
 
 
4,944
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
1,127
 
 
$
9,187
 
 
 
(1
)



Less
      amount representing interest

 
 
438
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Present
      value of net minimum lease payments

 
$
689
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








 
      


 
(1)


 
As
      of December 31, 2008, included in Accrued liabilities and Other
      liabilities and deferred credits on the accompanying consolidated balance
      sheet is approximately $1.1 billion relating to rent expense being
      recorded in advance of future operating lease
  payments.





At
December 31, 2008, the Company was operating 181 jet aircraft and 39 turboprop
aircraft and under operating leases and 76 jet aircraft under capital leases.
The aircraft leases can generally be renewed at rates based on fair market value
at the end of the lease term for one to five years.  Some aircraft
leases have purchase options at or near the end of the lease term at fair market
value, but generally not to exceed a stated percentage of the defined lessor's
cost of the aircraft or a predetermined fixed amount.

During
2008, the Company raised $354 million through sale leasebacks of certain
aircraft, including regional aircraft.  The gain on sale of $92
million is being amortized over the respective remaining lease
terms.  American leases all 39 Super ATR regional aircraft from a
third party (guaranteed by AMR) and in turn, subleases those aircraft to AMR
Eagle for operation.



 



 






 



5.         Leases
(Continued)

Special
facility revenue bonds have been issued by certain municipalities primarily to
improve airport facilities and purchase equipment.  To the extent
these transactions were committed to prior to May 21, 1998 (the effective date
of EITF 97-10, “The Effect of Lessee Involvement in Asset Construction”) they
are accounted for as operating leases under Financial Accounting Standards Board
Interpretation 23, “Leases of Certain Property Owned by a Governmental Unit or
Authority”.  Approximately $1.5 billion of these bonds (with total
future payments of approximately $3.4 billion as of December 31, 2008) are
guaranteed by American, AMR, or both. Approximately $177 million of these
special facility revenue bonds contain mandatory tender provisions that require
American to make operating lease payments sufficient to repurchase the bonds at
various times: $112 million in 2014 and $65 million in 2015. Although American
has the right to remarket the bonds, there can be no assurance that these bonds
will be successfully remarketed. Any payments to redeem or purchase bonds that
are not remarketed would generally reduce existing rent leveling accruals or be
considered prepaid facility rentals and would reduce future operating lease
commitments.  The special facility revenue bonds that contain
mandatory tender provisions are listed in the table above at their ultimate
maturity date rather than their mandatory tender provision date.

Rent
expense, excluding landing fees, was $1.3 billion, $1.4 billion and $1.4 billion
in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

American
has determined that it holds a significant variable interest in, but is not the
primary beneficiary of, certain trusts that are the lessors under 84 of its
aircraft operating leases. These leases contain a fixed price purchase option,
which allows American to purchase the aircraft at a predetermined price on a
specified date. However, American does not guarantee the residual value of the
aircraft.  As of December 31, 2008, future lease payments required
under these leases totaled $1.7 billion.

6.         Indebtedness

Long-term
debt consisted of (in millions):





 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Secured
      variable and fixed rate indebtedness due through 2021
(effective
      rates from 4.25% - 11.36% at December 31, 2008)

 
$
4,783
 
 
$
4,662
 



Enhanced
      equipment trust certificates due through 2012
(rates
      from 3.86% - 12.00% at December 31, 2008)

 
 
2,382
 
 
 
2,482
 



6.0%
      - 8.5% special facility revenue bonds due through 2036

 
 
1,674
 
 
 
1,688
 



Credit
      facility agreement due through 2010
(effective
      rate of 8.60% at December 31, 2008)

 
 
691
 
 
 
440
 



4.25%
      - 4.50% senior convertible notes due 2023 - 2024

 
 
314
 
 
 
619
 



9.0%
      - 10.20% debentures due through 2021

 
 
213
 
 
 
213
 



7.88%
      - 10.55% notes due through 2039

 
 
211
 
 
 
211
 


 
      
 
 
10,268
 
 
 
10,315
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Less
      current maturities

 
 
1,849
 
 
 
902
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Long-term
      debt, less current maturities

 
$
8,419
 
 
$
9,413
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Maturities
of long-term debt (including sinking fund requirements) for the next five years
are: 2009 - $1.8 billion; 2010 - $1.3 billion; 2011 - $2.2 billion; 2012 - $1.0
billion, 2013 - $700 million.



 



 






 



6.           Indebtedness
(Continued)

American’s
credit facility consists of a fully drawn $255 million senior secured revolving
credit facility (fully drawn in September 2008), and a $436 million term loan
facility (the Revolving Facility and the Term Loan Facility, respectively, and
collectively, the Credit Facility).   Advances under either
facility can be designated, at American’s election, as LIBOR rate advances or
base rate advances. Interest accrues at the LIBOR rate or base rate, as
applicable, plus, in either case, the applicable margin.  The
applicable margin with respect to the Revolving Facility can range from 2.50
percent to 4.00 percent per annum, in the case of LIBOR advances, and from 1.50
percent to 3.00 percent per annum, in the case of base rate advances, depending
upon the senior secured debt rating of the Credit Facility.  Based on
ratings as of December 31, 2008, the applicable margin with respect to the
Revolving Facility is 3.00 percent per annum in the case of LIBOR advances, and
2.00 percent per annum in the case of base rate advances.  The
applicable margin with respect to the Term Loan Facility is 2.00 percent per
annum in the case of LIBOR advances, and 1.00 percent per annum in the case of
base rate advances.

The
Revolving Facility matures on June 17, 2009.  The Term Loan Facility
matures on December 17, 2010 and amortizes quarterly at a rate of $1
million.  Principal amounts repaid under the Term Loan Facility may
not be re-borrowed.

The
Credit Facility is secured by certain aircraft.  The Credit Facility
includes a covenant that requires periodic appraisals of the aircraft at current
market value and requires American to pledge more aircraft or cash collateral if
the loan amount is more than 50 percent of the appraised value (after giving
effect to sublimits for specified categories of aircraft).  In
addition, the Credit Facility is secured by all of American’s existing route
authorities between the United States and Tokyo, Japan, together with certain
slots, gates and facilities that support the operation of such routes.
American’s obligations under the Credit Facility are guaranteed by AMR, and
AMR’s guaranty is secured by a pledge of all the outstanding shares of common
stock of American.
 
The
Credit Facility contains a covenant (the Liquidity Covenant) requiring American
to maintain, as defined, unrestricted cash, unencumbered short-term investments
and amounts available for drawing under committed revolving credit facilities
which have a final maturity of at least 12 months after the date of
determination, of not less than $1.25 billion for each quarterly period through
the remaining life of the Credit Facility. Securities meeting certain rating
criteria and with maturities within 18 months qualify for the Liquidity Covenant
provisions.

The
Credit Facility contains a covenant (the EBITDAR Covenant) requiring AMR to
maintain specified ratios of cash flow to fixed charges.  In May 2008,
AMR and American entered into an amendment to the Credit Facility which waived
compliance with the EBITDAR Covenant for periods ending on any date from and
including June 30, 2008 through March 31, 2009, and which reduced the minimum
ratios AMR is required to satisfy thereafter.  The required ratio will
be 0.90 to 1.00 for the one quarter period ending June 30, 2009 and will
increase to 1.15 to 1.00 for the four quarter period ending September 30,
2010.

AMR and
American were in compliance with the Liquidity Covenant at December 31, 2008 and
expect to be able to comply with this covenant in the
near-term.  Given fuel prices that have been very high by historical
standards and the volatility of fuel prices and revenues, uncertainty in the
capital markets and about other sources of funding, and other factors, it is
difficult to assess whether AMR and American will, in fact, be able to continue
to comply with the Liquidity Covenant and, in particular, the EBITDAR Covenant,
and there are no assurances that they will be able to do so.  Failure
to comply with these covenants would result in a default under the Credit
Facility which – if the Company did not take steps to obtain a waiver of, or
otherwise mitigate, the default – could result in a default under a significant
amount of the Company’s other debt and lease obligations and have a material
adverse impact on the Company.

As of
December 31, 2008, the Company had outstanding $318 million principal amount of
its 4.50 percent senior convertible notes due 2024 (the 4.50
Notes).  On February 17, 2009, virtually all of the holders of the
4.50 Notes exercised their elective put rights and the Company purchased and
retired these notes at a price equal to 100 percent of their principal
amount.  Under the terms of the 4.50 Notes, the Company had the option
to pay the purchase price with cash, stock, or a combination of cash and stock,
and the Company elected to pay for the 4.50 Notes solely with
cash.  The $318 million principal amount of the 4.50 Notes is recorded
as Current maturities of long-term debt as of December 31, 2008.



 



 






 



6.           Indebtedness
(Continued)

In August
2008, AMR retired, by purchasing with cash, $75 million of the $300 million
principal amount of the 4.25 percent senior convertible notes due 2023 (the 4.25
Notes).  In September 2008, the remaining holders of the 4.25 Notes
exercised their elective put rights and the Company purchased and retired these
notes at a price equal to 100 percent of their principal amount, totaling $225
million.  Under the terms of the 4.25 Notes, the Company had the
option to pay the purchase price with cash, stock, or a combination of cash and
stock, and the Company elected to pay for the 4.25 Notes solely with
cash.

Certain
debt is secured by aircraft, engines, equipment and other assets having a net
book value of approximately $10.5 billion as of December 31, 2008.

In 2008,
the Company raised approximately $500 million under a loan secured by
aircraft.  The loan bears interest at a LIBOR-based (London Interbank
Offered Rate) variable rate with a fixed margin which resets quarterly and is
due in installments through 2015.

As of
December 31, 2008, AMR has issued guarantees covering approximately $1.7 billion
of American’s tax-exempt bond debt and American has issued guarantees covering
approximately $745 million of AMR’s unsecured debt.  In addition, as
of December 31, 2008, AMR and American have issued guarantees covering
approximately $305 million of AMR Eagle’s secured debt, and AMR has issued
guarantees covering an additional $2.1 billion of AMR Eagle’s secured
debt.  In 2008, AMR issued guarantees covering $204 million of
American’s leases of 39 Super ATR aircraft, which are subleased to AMR
Eagle.

Cash
payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $685 million, $861
million and $944 million for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management

Fuel Price Risk
Management   In March of 2008, the FASB issued Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 161, “Disclosures about Derivative
Instruments and Hedging Activities, an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133”
(SFAS 161).  SFAS 161 requires entities to provide greater
transparency about how and why the entity uses derivative instruments, how the
instruments and related hedged items are accounted for under SFAS 133, and how
the instruments and related hedged items affect the financial position, results
of operations, and cash flows of the entity.  The Company adopted SFAS
161 effective December 31, 2008.

FSP FIN
39-1, “Amendment of FASB Interpretation No. 39,” requires a reporting entity to
elect a policy choice of whether to offset rights to reclaim cash collateral or
obligations to return cash collateral against derivative assets and liabilities
executed with the same counterparty, or present such amounts gross.  The
Company's accounting policy is to present its derivative assets and liabilities
gross including the collateral posted with or by the counterparty.
 

As part
of the Company's risk management program, it uses a variety of financial
instruments, primarily heating oil option and collar contracts, as cash flow
hedges to mitigate commodity price risk.  The Company does not hold or
issue derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.  As of
December 31, 2008, the Company had fuel derivative contracts outstanding
covering 35 million barrels of jet fuel that will be settled over the next 24
months.  A deterioration of the Company’s liquidity position may
negatively affect the Company’s ability to hedge fuel in the
future.



 



 






 



7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management (Continued)

In
accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting
for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activity” (SFAS 133), the Company
assesses, both at the inception of each hedge and on an on-going basis, whether
the derivatives that are used in its hedging transactions are highly effective
in offsetting changes in cash flows of the hedged items.  Derivatives
that meet the requirements of SFAS 133 are granted special hedge accounting
treatment, and the Company’s hedges generally meet these
requirements.  Accordingly, the Company’s fuel derivative contracts
are accounted for as cash flow hedges, and the fair value of the Company’s
hedging contracts is recorded in Current Assets or Current Liabilities in
the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the underlying jet fuel is
purchased. The Company determines the ineffective portion of its fuel hedge
contracts by comparing the cumulative change in the total value of the fuel
hedge contract, or group of fuel hedge contracts, to the cumulative change in a
hypothetical jet fuel hedge.  If the total cumulative change in value
of the fuel hedge contract more than offsets the total cumulative change in a
hypothetical jet fuel hedge, the difference is considered ineffective and is
immediately recognized as a component of Aircraft fuel
expense.  Effective gains or losses on fuel hedging contracts are
deferred in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized in
earnings as a component of Aircraft fuel expense when the underlying jet fuel
being hedged is used.

Ineffectiveness
is inherent in hedging jet fuel with derivative positions based in crude oil or
other crude oil related commodities.  In assessing effectiveness, the
Company uses a regression model to determine the correlation of the change in
prices of the commodities used to hedge jet fuel (e.g. NYMEX Heating oil) to the
change in the price of jet fuel.  The Company also monitors the actual
dollar offset of the hedges’ market values as compared to hypothetical jet fuel
hedges.  The fuel hedge contracts are generally deemed to be “highly
effective” if the R-squared is greater than 80 percent and dollar offset
correlation is within 80 percent to 125 percent.  The Company
discontinues hedge accounting prospectively if it determines that a derivative
is no longer expected to be highly effective as a hedge or if it decides to
discontinue the hedging relationship.  Subsequently, any changes in
the fair value of these derivatives are marked to market through earnings in the
period of change.

For the
years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company recognized net gains
of approximately $380 million, $239  million and $97 million,
respectively, as a component of fuel expense on the accompanying consolidated
statements of operations related to its fuel hedging agreements, including the
ineffective portion of the hedges.  In addition, in 2006, the Company
recognized a loss of $102 million in Miscellaneous – net for changes in market
value of hedges that did not qualify for hedge accounting during certain periods
in 2006.  The fair value of the Company’s fuel hedging agreements at
December 31, 2008 and 2007, representing the amount the Company would receive
(pay) to terminate the agreements, totaled ($450) million and $353 million,
respectively, which excludes a payable and a receivable, respectively, related
to contracts that settled in December of each year.  As of December
31, 2008, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months it will
reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings approximately
$711 million in net losses (based on prices as of December 31, 2008) related to
its fuel derivative hedges, including losses from terminated contracts with a
bankrupt counterparty and unwound trades.

The
impact of cash flow hedges on the Company’s consolidated financial statements
for the years ending December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, is depicted below
(in millions):






Fair
      Value of Aircraft Fuel Derivative Instruments (all cash flow hedges under
      SFAS 133)
 

 



Asset
      Derivatives as of December 31,

 

Liability
      Derivatives as of December 31,

 



2008

 

2007

 

2008

 

2007

 



Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 

Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 

Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 

Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 



Fuel
      derivative contracts

 
$
-
 

Fuel
      derivative contracts

 
$
416
 

Fuel
      derivative liability

 
$
528
 

Accrued
      liabilities

 
$
-
 







 



 






 



7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management (Continued)






Effect
      of Aircraft Fuel Derivative Instruments on Statements of Operations (all
      cash flow hedges under SFAS 133)

 


 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Amount
      of Gain (Loss) Recognized in OCI on Derivative1

 

Location
      of Gain (Loss) Reclassified from Accumulated OCI into Income 1

 

Amount
      of Gain (Loss) Reclassified from Accumulated OCI into Income 1

 

Location
      of Gain (Loss) Recognized in Income on Derivative 2

 

Amount
      of Gain (Loss) Recognized in Income on Derivative 2

 



2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 


$
(738
)
 
$
381
 

Aircraft
      Fuel

 
$
378
 
 
$
165
 

Aircraft
      Fuel

 
$
2
 
 
$
74
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



1 Effective
      portion of gain (loss)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2 Ineffective
      portion of gain (loss)

 
 
 
 
 





The
Company is also exposed to credit losses in the event of non-performance by
counterparties to these financial instruments, and although no assurances can be
given, the Company does not expect any of the counterparties to fail to meet its
obligations.  The credit exposure related to these financial
instruments is represented by the fair value of contracts with a positive fair
value at the reporting date, reduced by the effects of master netting
agreements.  To manage credit risks, the Company selects
counterparties based on credit ratings, limits its exposure to a single
counterparty under defined guidelines, and monitors the market position of the
program and its relative market position with each counterparty. The Company
also maintains industry-standard security agreements with a number of its
counterparties which may require the Company or the counterparty to post
collateral if the value of selected instruments exceed specified mark-to-market
thresholds or upon certain changes in credit ratings.  A deterioration
of the Company’s liquidity position may negatively affect the Company’s ability
to hedge fuel in the future.

Certain
of the Company’s derivative instrument contracts provide that if the Company’s
unrestricted cash balance or credit ratings remain above certain levels, loss
positions on these instruments need not be fully collateralized.  If
the Company’s unrestricted cash balance or credit rating were to fall below
these levels, it would trigger additional collateral to be deposited with the
counterparty up to 100 percent of the loss position of the derivative
contracts.  As of December 31, 2008, the aggregate fair value of all
derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that are in
a net liability position is $528 million, for which the Company had posted
collateral of $575 million.  The Company was over-collateralized as of
December 31, 2008 due to a timing lag in collateral reconciliation of $92
million by a certain counterparty.  Excluding the impact of this
timing lag, if all credit-risk-contingent features underlying these agreements
had been triggered on December 31, 2008, the Company would have been required to
post collateral of 100 percent of the loss position referred to above, or $528
million.

During
2008, a counterparty to certain of the Company’s fuel hedging derivative
contracts filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy
Code.  Per the contract, the Company was able to terminate its hedge
positions with this counterparty as a result of the counterparty’s
default.  Due to the decline in fuel prices subsequent to the Chapter
11 filing, the Company was in a liability position to this counterparty at the
time the hedge position was terminated.  The Company incurred a charge
of $26 million associated with these contracts during the period subsequent to
the Chapter 11 filing and prior to termination, when the derivative contracts no
longer qualified for hedge accounting under SFAS 133.  The charge was
recorded to Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations.  Had the Company retained these hedge positions, this
charge would have been incurred as fuel expense over the next two years assuming
a static fuel price from the termination date.
 

In fourth quarter of 2008,
the Company modified its fuel hedge portfolio, effectively settling certain
derivatives hedging 2009 jet fuel purchases. The Company entered into fuel
hedging collars to unwind certain trades with two of the Company’s
counterparties. The Company has de-designated these unwound hedges as
prescribed by SFAS 133, and entered into four directly counteractive economic
derivatives to, in effect, settle these positions.  At the date of
de-designation of these hedges, the Company had recorded a $205 million loss in
Accumulated other comprehensive income which will be reclassified into Aircraft
fuel expense in 2009.  The fair value of these offsetting positions
not designated as hedges under SFAS 133 as of December 31, 2008 was a $188
million asset recorded in Fuel derivative contracts and a $188 million liability
recorded in Fuel derivative liability.








7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management (Continued)

Fair Values of Financial
Instruments   The fair values of the Company's long-term
debt were estimated using quoted market prices where available.  For
long-term debt not actively traded, fair values were estimated using discounted
cash flow analyses, based on the Company's current incremental borrowing rates
for similar types of borrowing arrangements.

The
carrying amounts and estimated fair values of the Company's long-term debt,
including current maturities, were (in millions):




 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 

Carrying
      Value

 
 

Fair
Value

 
 

Carrying
      Value

 
 

Fair
Value

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Secured
      variable and fixed rate indebtedness

 
$
4,783
 
 
$
2,534
 
 
$
4,662
 
 
$
3,896
 



Enhanced
      equipment trust certificates

 
 
2,382
 
 
 
1,885
 
 
 
2,482
 
 
 
2,472
 



6.0%
      - 8.5% special facility revenue bonds

 
 
1,674
 
 
 
1,001
 
 
 
1,688
 
 
 
1,801
 



Credit
      facility agreement

 
 
691
 
 
 
545
 
 
 
440
 
 
 
423
 



4.25%
      - 4.50 % senior convertible notes

 
 
314
 
 
 
308
 
 
 
619
 
 
 
670
 



9.0%
      - 10.20% debentures

 
 
213
 
 
 
105
 
 
 
213
 
 
 
178
 



7.88%
      - 10.55% notes

 
 
211
 
 
 
96
 
 
 
211
 
 
 
195
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
10,268
 
 
$
6,474
 
 
$
10,315
 
 
$
9,635
 





8.         Income
Taxes

On
January 1, 2007, the Company adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board
Interpretation No. 48 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes” (FIN
48).  FIN 48 prescribes a recognition threshold that a tax position is
required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements and
provides guidance on derecognition, measurement, classification, interest and
penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition
issues.

The
Company has an unrecognized tax benefit of approximately $24 million which
decreased $16 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2008 due to
settlement of the 2001 through 2003 Internal Revenue Service
examination.  Changes in the unrecognized tax benefit have no impact
on the effective tax rate due to the existence of the valuation
allowance.  Accrued interest on tax positions is recorded as a
component of interest expense but is not significant at December 31,
2008.  

The
reconciliation of the beginning and ending amounts of unrecognized tax benefit
are (in millions):





 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Unrecognized
      Tax Benefit at January 1

 
$
40
 
 
$
41
 



   Decreases
      due to settlements with taxing authority

 
 
(16
)
 
 
(1
)



Unrecognized
      Tax Benefit at December 31

 
$
24
 
 
$
40
 





The
Company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefit may change within the next
twelve months depending on the outcome of the pending Internal Revenue Service
Appeals case.

The
Company files its tax returns as prescribed by the tax laws of the jurisdictions
in which it operates.   The Company’s 2004 through 2007 tax years
are still subject to examination by the Internal Revenue
Service.  Various state and foreign jurisdiction tax years remain open
to examination as well, though the Company believes that the effect of any
additional assessment(s) will be immaterial to its consolidated
financial statements.



 



 






 



8.         Income Taxes
(Continued)

The
income tax expense or benefit differed from amounts computed at the statutory
federal income tax rate as follows (in millions):




 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Statutory
      income tax provision expense/(benefit)

 
$
(725
)
 
$
176
 
 
$
81
 



State
      income tax expense/(benefit),
       net
      of federal tax effect

 
 
(49
)
 
 
10
 
 
 
15
 



Meal
      expense

 
 
8
 
 
 
9
 
 
 
7
 



Change
      in valuation allowance

 
 
791
 
 
 
(180
)
 
 
(124
)



Other,
      net

 
 
(25
)
 
 
(15
)
 
 
21
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Income
      tax benefit

 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 





In
addition to the changes in the valuation allowance from operations described in
the table above, the valuation allowance was also impacted by the changes in the
components of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), described in Note
12.  The total increase (decrease) in the valuation allowance was
$2,109 million, ($696) million, and ($18) million in 2008, 2007, and 2006,
respectively.

The
Company provides a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets when it is more
likely than not that some portion, or all of its deferred tax assets, will not
be realized. In assessing the realizability of the deferred tax assets,
management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion, or
all of the deferred tax assets, will be realized. The ultimate realization of
deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income
(including reversals of deferred tax liabilities) during the periods in which
those temporary differences will become deductible.

The
components of AMR's deferred tax assets and liabilities were (in
millions):






 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Deferred
      tax assets:

 
 
 
 
 
 



Postretirement
      benefits other than pensions

 
$
1,168
 
 
$
1,162
 



Rent
      expense

 
 
437
 
 
 
487
 



Alternative
      minimum tax credit carryforwards

 
 
410
 
 
 
413
 



Operating
      loss carryforwards

 
 
2,268
 
 
 
2,269
 



Pensions

 
 
1,533
 
 
 
405
 



Frequent
      flyer obligation

 
 
338
 
 
 
308
 



Gains
      from lease transactions

 
 
98
 
 
 
98
 



Other

 
 
1,056
 
 
 
722
 



   Total
      deferred tax assets

 
 
7,308
 
 
 
5,864
 



Valuation
      allowance

 
 
(2,734
)
 
 
(625
)



Net
      deferred tax assets

 
 
4,574
 
 
 
5,239
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Deferred
      tax liabilities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Accelerated
      depreciation and amortization

 
 
(4,400
)
 
 
(4,960
)



Other

 
 
(174
)
 
 
(279
)



Total
      deferred tax liabilities

 
 
(4,574
)
 
 
(5,239
)



Net
      deferred tax liability

 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 







At
December 31, 2008, the Company had available for federal income tax purposes an
alternative minimum tax credit carryforward of approximately $410 million, which
is available for an indefinite period, and federal net operating losses of
approximately $6.6 billion for regular tax purposes, which will expire, if
unused, beginning in 2022.  These net operating losses include an
SFAS123(R) unrealized benefit of approximately $649 million related to the
implementation of SFAS 123(R) that will be recorded in equity when
realized.  The Company had available for state income tax purposes net
operating losses of $3.9 billion, which expire, if unused, in years 2009 through
2027. The amount that will expire in 2009 is $74 million.







8.         Income Taxes
(Continued)

Cash
payments (refunds) for income taxes were ($14) million, $7 million and $1
million for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

Under
special tax rules (the Section 382 Limitation), cumulative stock ownership
changes among material shareholders exceeding 50 percent during a 3-year period
can potentially limit a company’s future use of net operating losses and tax
credits (NOL’s).  The Section 382 limitation may be increased
by certain “built-in gains,” as provided by current IRS guidance.  Based on available
information, the Company believes it is not currently subject to the Section 382
Limitation.  If triggered under current conditions, the Section 382
limitation is not expected to significantly impact the recorded value of
deferred taxes or timing of utilization of the Company’s
NOL's.

9.         Share Based
Compensation

AMR
grants stock compensation under two plans: the 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan and
the 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan (the 2003 Plan).

Under the
1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, officers and key employees of AMR and
its subsidiaries may be granted certain types of stock or performance based
awards.  At December 31, 2008, the Company had stock option/settled
stock appreciation right (SSAR) awards, performance share awards, deferred share
awards and other awards outstanding under this plan.  The total number
of common shares authorized for distribution under the 1998 Long Term Incentive
Plan is 23,700,000 shares.  The 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, the
successor to the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan (collectively, the LTIP Plans),
was terminated in 2008.

In 2003,
the Company established the 2003 Plan to provide equity awards to
employees.  Under the 2003 Plan, employees may be granted stock
options/SSARs, restricted stock and deferred stock. At December 31, 2008, the
Company had stock options/SSARs and deferred awards outstanding under the 2003
Plan.  The total number of shares authorized for distribution under
the 2003 Plan is 42,680,000 shares.

In 2008,
2007 and 2006, the total charge for share-based compensation expense included in
wages, salaries and benefits expense was $53 million, $131 million and $219
million, respectively.  In 2008, 2007 and 2006, the amount of cash
used to settle equity instruments granted under share-based compensation plans
was $24 million, $11 million and $29 million, respectively.

Stock
Options/SSARs   During 2006, the AMR Board of Directors
approved an amendment covering all of the outstanding stock options previously
granted under the LTIP Plans. The Amendment added to each of the outstanding
options an additional stock settled stock appreciation right (SSAR) in tandem
with each of the then outstanding stock options. The addition of the SSAR did
not impact the fair value of the stock options, but simply allowed the Company
to settle the exercise of the option by issuing the net number of shares equal
to the in-the-money value of the option.  This amendment is estimated
to make available enough shares to permit the Company to settle all outstanding
performance and deferred share awards in stock rather than cash.

Options/SSARs
granted under the LTIP Plans and the 2003 Plan are awarded with an exercise
price equal to the fair market value of the stock on date of grant, become
exercisable in equal annual installments over periods ranging from two to five
years and expire no later than ten years from the date of
grant.  Expense for the options is recognized on a straight-line
basis.  The fair value of each award is estimated on the date of grant
using the modified Black-Scholes option valuation model and the assumptions
noted in the following table.  Expected volatilities are based on
implied volatilities from traded options on the Company’s stock, historical
volatility of the Company’s stock, and other factors.  The Company
uses historical employee exercise data to estimate the expected term of awards
granted used in the valuation model.  The risk-free rate is based on
the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant.  The
dividend yield is assumed to be zero based on the Company’s history and
expectation of not paying dividends.


 



 





 

9.           Share Based Compensation
(Continued)




 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Expected
      volatility

 

    53.0%
      to 55.9%

 
 

               49.7%
      to 51.6%

 
 

              
      52.5% to 55.0%

 



Expected
      term (in years)

 
 

4.0           
      

 
 
 
4.
      0         
 
 
 
4.0      
      
 



Risk-free
      rate

 

    2.98%
      to 3.15%

 
 

               4.43%
      to 5.03%

 
 

              
      4.35% to 5.07%

 



Annual
      forfeiture rate

 
 
10.0%       
      
 
 
 
10.0%    
 
 
 
10.0%    
      
 





A summary
of stock option/SSARs activity under the LTIP Plans and the 2003 Plan as of
December 31, 2008, and changes during the year then ended is presented
below:







 
      
 

LTIP
      Plans

 
 

The
      2003 Plan

 


 
      
 



 
 
 
Options/SSARs

 
 



Weighted
      Average
Exercise
      Price

 
 



 
 
 
Options

 
 



Weighted
      Average Exercise Price

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
11,844,615
 
 
$
27.76
 
 
 
14,276,053
 
 
$
5.66
 



Granted

 
 
2,722,740
 
 
 
8.23
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Exercised

 
 
(500
)
 
 
4.25
 
 
 
(347,057
)
 
 
5.25
 



Forfeited
      or Expired

 
 
(760,907
)
 
 
28.26
 
 
 
(119,004
)
 
 
6.83
 



 
     
      Outstanding at December 31

 
 
13,805,948
 
 
 
 23.88
 
 
 
13,809,992
 
 
 
 5.66
 



 
Exercisable
      at December 31

 
 
9,714,226
 
 
 
 28.48
 
 
 
13,491,727
 
 
 
 5.52
 



 
Weighted
      Average Remaining Contractual Term of Options Outstanding (in
      years)

 
 
    4.3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    4.4
 
 
 
 
 



 
Aggregate
      Intrinsic Value of Options Outstanding

 
$
 7,605,694
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
 70,509,340
 
 
 
 
 







The
aggregate intrinsic value of all vested options/SSARs is $71 million and those
options have an average remaining contractual life of 3.6 years.  The
weighted-average grant date fair value of options/SSARs granted during 2008,
2007 and 2006 was $3.78, $12.63 and $10.93, respectively.  The total
intrinsic value of options/SSARs exercised during 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $2
million, $193 million and $350 million, respectively.

A summary
of the status of the Company’s non-vested options/SSARs under all plans as of
December 31, 2008, and changes during the year ended December 31, 2008, is
presented below:




 
      
 
 
 
 



Weighted

 


 
      
 



 
Options/SSARs

 
 

Average
   
      Grant Date Fair Value

 



 
Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
2,965,521
 
 
$
8.07
 



Granted

 
 
2,722,740
 
 
 
3.78
 



Vested

 
 
(1,260,844
)
 
 
6.55
 



Forfeited

 
 
(17,430
)
 
 
4.78
 



  Outstanding
      at December 31

 
 
4,409,987
 
 
 
5.87
 











9.           Share Based Compensation
(Continued)

As of
December 31, 2008, there was $15 million of total unrecognized compensation cost
related to non-vested stock options/SSARs granted under the LTIP Plans and the
2003 Plan that is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of
3.3 years.  The total fair value of stock options/SSARs vested during
the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, was $9 million, $9 million and
$25 million, respectively.

Cash
received by the Company from exercise of stock options for the years ended
December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, was $1 million, $90 million and $230 million,
respectively.  No tax benefit was realized as a result of stock
options/SSARs exercised in 2008 due to the tax valuation allowance discussed in
Note 8.

Performance Share
Awards   During 2006 and 2007, the AMR Board of Directors
approved the amendment and restatement of all of the outstanding performance
share plans, the related performance share agreements and deferred share
agreements that required settlement in cash (collectively, the Amended
Plans).  The plans were amended to permit settlement in a combination
of cash and/or stock; however, the amendments did not impact the fair value of
the awards under the Amended Plans.  As a result of these actions, any
amounts accrued as liabilities at the time of conversion or at the time it
became probable that sufficient shares would be available to settle the Amended
Plans were reclassified from accrued liabilities to Additional paid-in
capital.  Accordingly, these awards are now accounted for as market
condition awards in accordance with SFAS 123(R).

Performance
share awards are granted under the LTIP Plans, generally vest pursuant to a
three year measurement period and are settled on the vesting
date.  The number of awards ultimately issued under performance share
awards is contingent on AMR’s relative stock price performance compared to
certain of its competitors over a three year period and can range from zero to
175 percent of the awards granted.  The fair value of performance
awards is calculated by multiplying the stock price on the date of grant by the
expected payout percentage and the number of shares granted.

Activity
during 2008 for performance awards accounted for as equity awards
was:
 




 
      
 



 
Awards

 


Weighted AverageRemaining
      Contractual Term

 

Aggregate
      Intrinsic Value



 
      
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
      



Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
5,400,441
 
 
      
 
 
      



Reclassified
      to liability awards

 
 
(97,215
)
 
      
 
 
      



Granted

 
 
2,850,240
 
 
      
 
 
      



Settled

 
 
(2,330,852
)
 
      
 
 
      



Forfeited
      or Expired

 
 
(56,361
)
 
      
 
 
      



 
 
            Outstanding at December 31

 
 
5,766,253
 

 
1.5

 

 
$   61,360,092






The
aggregate intrinsic value represents the Company’s current estimate of the
number of shares (5,750,712 shares at December 31, 2008) that will ultimately be
distributed for outstanding awards computed using the market value of the
Company’s common stock at December 31, 2008.  The weighted-average
grant date fair value per share of performance share awards granted during 2008,
2007, and 2006 was $8.20, $28.52 and $25.01, respectively.  The total
fair value of equity awards settled during the year ended December 31, 2008 was
$14 million.  As of December 31, 2008, there was $38 million of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to performance share awards that is
expected to be recognized over a period of 1.6 years.

Deferred
Awards   The distribution of deferred share awards granted
under the LTIP Plans is based solely on a requisite service period (generally 36
months).  Career equity awards granted to certain employees of the
Company vest upon the retirement of those individuals.  The fair value
of each deferred award is based on AMR’s stock price on the measurement
date.

 

 






 



9.           Share Based Compensation
(Continued)

Activity
during 2008 for deferred awards accounted for as equity awards was:
 




 
      
 



 
Shares

 


Weighted
      Average Remaining
      Contractual Term

 

 
Aggregate
      Intrinsic Value



 
      
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
      



Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
3,668,797
 
 
      
 
 
      



Granted

 
 
1,009,278
 
 
      
 
 
      



Settled

 
 
(565,235
)
 
      
 
 
      



Forfeited
      or Expired

 
 
(64,962
)
 
      
 
 
      



 
     
      Outstanding at December 31

 
 
4,047,878
 

 
3.9

 

 
$   43,190,858






The
weighted-average grant date fair value per share of deferred awards granted
during 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $8.23, $28.54 and $25.12,
respectively.  The total fair value of awards settled during the years
ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $6 million, $24 million and $4
million, respectively.  As of December 31, 2008, there was $25 million
of total unrecognized compensation cost related to deferred awards that is
expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3.4
years.

Other
Awards   As of December 31, 2008, certain performance
share agreements and deferred share award agreements were accounted for as a
liability, or as equity, as appropriate, in the consolidated balance sheet as
the plans only permit settlement in cash or the awards required that the
employee meet certain performance conditions which were not subject to market
measurement.  As a result, SFAS 123(R) required awards under these
agreements to be marked to current market value.  As of December 31,
2008, the aggregate intrinsic value of these awards was $7 million and the
weighted average remaining contractual term of these awards was 2.2
years.  The total fair value of awards settled during the years ended
December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $24 million, $11 million, and $29 million
respectively.  As of December 31, 2008, there was $3 million of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to other awards that is expected to be
recognized over a weighted average period of 4.4 years.

10.         Retirement
Benefits

All
employees of the Company may participate in pension plans if they meet the
plans’ eligibility requirements.  The defined benefit plans provide
benefits for participating employees based on years of service and average
compensation for a specified period of time before retirement. The Company uses
a December 31 measurement date for all of its defined benefit plans. American’s
pilots also participate in a defined contribution plan for which Company
contributions are determined as a percentage (11 percent) of participant
compensation.  Certain non-contract employees (including all new
non-contract employees) participate in a defined contribution plan in which the
Company will match the employees’ before-tax contribution on a dollar-for-dollar
basis, up to 5.5 percent of their pensionable pay.

In
addition to pension benefits, retiree medical and other postretirement benefits,
including certain health care and life insurance benefits (which provide
secondary coverage to Medicare), are provided to retired
employees.  The amount of health care benefits is limited to lifetime
maximums as outlined in the plan.  Substantially all regular employees
of American and employees of certain other subsidiaries may become eligible for
these benefits if they satisfy eligibility requirements during their working
lives.

Certain
employee groups make contributions toward funding a portion of their retiree
health care benefits during their working lives.  The Company funds
benefits as incurred and makes contributions to match employee
prefunding.



 



 





 

10.           Retirement Benefits
(Continued)

In 2007,
the Fair Treatment for Experienced Pilots Act (H.R. 4343) was signed into law,
raising the mandatory retirement age for commercial pilots from 60 to
65.  Previously, the FAA required commercial pilots to retire once
they reached age 60.  As a result, the Company has estimated the
average retirement age for the pilot workgroup to be 63, based on the
approximate retirement age of the Company’s other work groups, which did not
have the same mandatory retirement age.  This change in the estimate
of pilot retirement age caused a decrease to the pension and other
postretirement liability of approximately $543 million at December 31,
2007.

The
following table provides a reconciliation of the changes in the pension and
retiree medical and other benefit obligations and fair value of assets for the
years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, and a statement of funded status as of
December 31, 2008 and 2007 (in millions):













 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Reconciliation of benefit
      obligation

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Obligation
      at January 1

 
$
10,451
 
 
$
11,048
 
 
$
2,672
 
 
$
3,256
 



Service
      cost

 
 
324
 
 
 
370
 
 
 
54
 
 
 
71
 



Interest
      cost

 
 
684
 
 
 
672
 
 
 
172
 
 
 
194
 



Actuarial
      (gain) loss

 
 
254
 
 
 
(1,021
)
 
 
22
 
 
 
(693
)



Plan
      amendments

 
 
(14
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Benefit
      payments

 
 
(815
)
 
 
(618
)
 
 
(141
)
 
 
(156
)



Obligation
      at December 31

 
$
10,884
 
 
$
10,451
 
 
$
2,779
 
 
$
2,672
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reconciliation of fair value of plan
      assets

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Fair
      value of plan assets at January 1

 
$
9,099
 
 
$
8,565
 
 
$
224
 
 
$
202
 



Actual
      return on plan assets

 
 
(1,659
)
 
 
766
 
 
 
(75
)
 
 
9
 



Employer
      contributions

 
 
89
 
 
 
386
 
 
 
153
 
 
 
168
 



Benefit
      payments

 
 
(815
)
 
 
(618
)
 
 
(141
)
 
 
(155
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Fair
      value of plan assets at December 31

 
$
6,714
 
 
$
9,099
 
 
$
161
 
 
$
224
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Funded
      status at December 31

 
$
(4,170
)
 
$
(1,352
)
 
$
(2,618
)
 
$
(2,448
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Amounts recognized in the
consolidated balance sheets

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Current
      liability

 
$
11
 
 
$
6
 
 
$
163
 
 
$
170
 



Noncurrent
      liability

 
 
4,159
 
 
 
1,346
 
 
 
2,455
 
 
 
2,278
 


 
      
 
$
4,170
 
 
$
1,352
 
 
$
2,618
 
 
$
2,448
 



 
Amounts recognized in
other comprehensive loss

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      actuarial loss (gain)

 
$
2,839
 
 
$
245
 
 
$
(458
)
 
$
(605
)



Prior
      service cost (credit)

 
 
108
 
 
 
137
 
 
 
(53
)
 
 
(65
)


 
      
 
$
2,947
 
 
$
382
 
 
$
(511
)
 
$
(670
)




















For plans with accumulated
      benefit
obligations exceeding the fair
      value
of plan assets

 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Projected
      benefit obligation (PBO)

 
$
10,884
 
 
$
10,451
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 



Accumulated
      benefit obligation (ABO)

 
 
9,656
 
 
 
9,486
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Accumulated
      postretirement benefit obligation (APBO)

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
2,779
 
 
 
2,672
 



Fair
      value of plan assets

 
 
6,714
 
 
 
9,099
 
 
 
161
 
 
 
224
 



ABO
      less fair value of plan assets

 
 
2,942
 
 
 
387
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 




















10.         Retirement Benefits
(Continued)

At
December 31, 2008 and 2007, pension benefit plan assets of $460 million and $127
million, respectively, and retiree medical and other benefit plan assets of $158
million and $220 million, respectively, were invested in shares of certain
mutual funds.

The
following tables provide the components of net periodic benefit cost for the
years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 (in millions):







 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



Components of net periodic benefit
      cost

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Defined
      benefit plans:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Service
      cost

 
$
324
 
 
$
370
 
 
$
399
 



Interest
      cost

 
 
684
 
 
 
672
 
 
 
641
 



Expected
      return on assets

 
 
(789
)
 
 
(747
)
 
 
(669
)



Amortization
      of:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Transition
      asset

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(1
)



Prior
      service cost

 
 
16
 
 
 
16
 
 
 
16
 



Settlement

 
 
103
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Unrecognized
      net loss

 
 
3
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
81
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      periodic benefit cost for defined benefit plans

 
 
 341
 
 
 
336
 
 
 
467
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Defined
      contribution plans

 
 
170
 
 
 
166
 
 
 
164
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
511
 
 
$
502
 
 
$
631
 













 
      
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Components of net periodic benefit
      cost

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Service
      cost

 
$
54
 
 
$
70
 
 
$
78
 



Interest
      cost

 
 
172
 
 
 
194
 
 
 
194
 



Expected
      return on assets

 
 
(20
)
 
 
(18
)
 
 
(15
)



Amortization
      of:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Prior
      service cost

 
 
(13
)
 
 
(13
)
 
 
(10
)



Unrecognized
      net loss (gain)

 
 
(22
)
 
 
(7
)
 
 
1
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      periodic benefit cost

 
$
171
 
 
$
226
 
 
$
248
 






The
estimated net loss and prior service cost for the defined benefit pension plans
that will be amortized from Accumulated other comprehensive income into net
periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year are $145 million and $8 million,
respectively.  The estimated net gain and prior service credit for the
retiree medical and other postretirement plans that will be amortized from
Accumulated other comprehensive income into net periodic benefit cost over the
next fiscal year are $14 million and $8 million, respectively.






 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Weighted-average assumptions used to determine
      benefit obligations as of December 31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Discount
      rate

 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%



Salary
      scale (ultimate)

 
 
3.78
 
 
 
3.78
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



 

 






 





10.         Retirement Benefits
(Continued)






 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Weighted-average assumptions used to determine net
      periodic benefit cost for the years ended December
    31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Discount
      rate

 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.00
%
 
 
6.00
%
 
 
6.00
%



Salary
      scale (ultimate)

 
 
3.78
 
 
 
3.78
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Expected
      return on plan assets

 
 
8.75
 
 
 
8.75
 
 
 
8.75
 
 
 
8.75
 






As of
December 31, 2008, the Company’s estimate of the long-term rate of return on
plan assets was 8.75 percent based on the target asset
allocation.  Expected returns on longer duration bonds are based on
yields to maturity of the bonds held at year-end.  Expected returns on
other assets are based on a combination of long-term historical returns, actual
returns on plan assets achieved over the last ten years, current and expected
market conditions, and expected value to be generated through active management,
currency overlay and securities lending programs.  The Company’s
annualized ten-year rate of return on plan assets as of December 31, 2008, was
approximately 6.81 percent.

The
Company’s pension plan weighted-average asset allocations at December 31, by
asset category, are as follows:






 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Long
      duration bonds

 
 
48
%
 
 
41
%



U.S.
      stocks

 
 
22
 
 
 
26
 



International
      stocks

 
 
15
 
 
 
21
 



Emerging
      markets stocks and bonds

 
 
4
 
 
 
5
 



Alternative
      (private) investments

 
 
11
 
 
 
7
 



 
     Total

 
 
100
%
 
 
100
%






The
Company’s target asset allocation is 35 percent longer duration corporate and
U.S. government/agency bonds, 25 percent U.S. value stocks, 20 percent developed
international stocks, five percent emerging markets stocks and bonds, and 15
percent alternative (private) investments. Each asset class is actively managed
and, historically, the plans’ assets have produced returns, net of management
fees, in excess of the expected rate of return over the last ten years. Stocks
and emerging market bonds are used to provide diversification and are expected
to generate higher returns over the long-term than longer duration U.S. bonds.
Public stocks are managed using a value investment approach in order to
participate in the returns generated by stocks in the long-term, while reducing
year-over-year volatility. Longer duration U.S. bonds are used to partially
hedge the assets from declines in interest rates. Alternative (private)
investments are used to provide expected returns in excess of the public markets
over the long-term.  Additionally, the Company engages currency
overlay managers in an attempt to increase returns by protecting non-U.S. dollar
denominated assets from a rise in the relative value of the U.S.
dollar.  The Company also participates in securities lending programs
to generate additional income by loaning plan assets to borrowers on a fully
collateralized basis.  These programs are subject to market
risk.






 
      
 

Pre-65
      Individuals

 
 

Post-65
      Individuals

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Assumed health care trend rates at December
      31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Health
      care cost trend rate assumed for next year

 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%
 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%



Rate
      to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (the ultimate trend
      rate)

 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%



Year
      that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate

 



           2015

 
 



          
      2010

 
 



           2015

 
 



           2010

 





 

















10.         Retirement Benefits
(Continued)

A one
percentage point change in the assumed health care cost trend rates would have
the following effects (in millions):





 
      
 

One
      Percent Increase

 
 

One
      Percent Decrease

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Impact
      on 2008 service and interest cost

 
 
20
 
 
 
(20
)



Impact
      on postretirement benefit obligation
  as
      of December 31, 2008

 
 
224
 
 
 
(219
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





The
Company has no required 2009 contributions to its defined benefit pension plans
under the provisions of the Pension Funding Equity Act of 2004 and the Pension
Protection Act of 2006.  The Company’s estimates of its defined
benefit pension plan contributions reflect the current provisions of the Pension
Funding Equity Act of 2004 and the Pension Protection Act of
2006.  The Company expects to contribute approximately $13 million to
its retiree medical and other benefit plan in 2009.

The
following benefit payments, which reflect expected future service as
appropriate, are expected to be paid:








 
 
 

 

 
 

Retiree
      Medical 

 


 
 
 

     Pension

 
 

  and
      Other

 



2009

 
 
$
514
 
 
$
163
 



2010

 
 
 
565
 
 
 
168
 



2011

 
 
 
587
 
 
 
176
 



2012

 
 
 
617
 
 
 
175
 



2013

 
 
 
728
 
 
 
181
 


2014
      - 2018
 
 
 
 
4,372
 
 
 
1,007
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








During
2008, AMR recorded a settlement charge totaling $103 million related to lump sum
distributions from the Company’s defined benefit pension plans to pilots who
retired.   Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 88,
"Employers’ Accounting for Settlements and Curtailments of Defined Benefit
Pension Plans and for Termination Benefits" ("SFAS 88"), requires the use of
settlement accounting if, for a given year, the cost of all settlements exceeds,
or is expected to exceed, the sum of the service cost and interest cost
components of net periodic pension expense for a plan. Under settlement
accounting, unrecognized plan gains or losses must be recognized immediately in
proportion to the percentage reduction of the plan's projected benefit
obligation.



 



 






 



11.         Intangible
Assets

In April
2007, the United States and the EU approved an “open skies” air services
agreement that provides airlines from the United States and EU member states
open access to each other’s markets, with freedom of pricing and unlimited
rights to fly beyond the United States and any airport in the EU including
London’s Heathrow Airport.  The provisions of the agreement were
effective on March 30, 2008.  Under the agreement, every U.S. and EU
airline is authorized to operate between airports in the United States and
Heathrow.  Notwithstanding the open skies agreement, Heathrow is a
slot-controlled airport.  Only three airlines besides American were
previously allowed to provide that Heathrow service.  The Company has
recorded route acquisition costs (including international routes and slots) of
$828 million and $846 million as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively,
including a significant amount related to operations at Heathrow.  The
Company considers these assets indefinite life assets under Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 142 “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” and as a
result, they are not amortized but instead are tested for impairment annually or
more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset
might be impaired.  The Company has completed an impairment analysis
and has concluded that no impairment exists.

The
following tables provide information relating to the Company’s amortized
intangible assets as of December 31 (in millions):






 
      
 

2008

 


 
      
 



Cost

 
 

Accumulated
      Amortization

 
 

Net
      Book Value

 



Amortized
      intangible assets:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airport
      operating rights

 
$
515
 
 
$
302
 
 
$
213
 



Gate
      lease rights

 
 
182
 
 
 
114
 
 
 
68
 



Total

 
$
697
 
 
$
416
 
 
$
281
 











 
      
 

2007

 


 
      
 



Cost

 
 

Accumulated
      Amortization

 
 

Net
      Book Value

 



Amortized
      intangible assets:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airport
      operating rights

 
$
517
 
 
$
282
 
 
$
235
 



Gate
      lease rights

 
 
182
 
 
 
107
 
 
 
75
 



Total

 
$
699
 
 
$
389
 
 
$
310
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 






Airport
operating and gate lease rights are being amortized on a straight-line basis
over 25 years to a zero residual value.  The Company recorded
amortization expense related to these intangible assets of approximately $28
million for each of the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively. The Company expects to record annual amortization expense of
approximately $27 million in each of the next five years related to these
intangible assets.



 



 






 



12.         Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income (Loss)

The
components of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) are as follows (in
millions):




 
      
 



Pension
      and Retiree Medical Liability

 
 



 
Unrealized
      Gain/(Loss) on Investments

 
 



 
 
Derivative
      Financial Instruments

 
 



 
 
Income
Tax
      Benefit

 
 



 
 
 
 
Total

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Balance
      at January 1, 2006

 
$
(1,206
)
 
$
3
 
 
$
79
 
 
$
145
 
 
$
(979
)



Current
      year net change

 
 
748
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
748
 



Reclassification
      of derivative financial instruments into earnings

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(88
)
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(88
)



Change
      in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  26
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  26
 



    Adjustment
      resulting from adoption of SFAS 158

 
 
(998
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(998
)



Balance
      at December 31, 2006

 
$
(1,456
)
 
$
3
 
 
$
17
 
 
$
145
 
 
$
(1,291
)



Current
      year change

 
 
1,723
 
 
 
(6
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
1,717
 



Amortization
      of actuarial loss and prior service cost

 
 
 21
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 21
 



Reclassification
      of derivative financial instruments into earnings

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(158
)
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(158
)



Change
      in fair value of derivative
      financial instruments

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  381
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
   381
 



Balance
      at December 31, 2007

 
$
288
 
 
$
(3
)
 
$
240
 
 
$
145
 
 
$
670
 



Current
      year change

 
 
(2,707
)
 
 
(7
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(2,714
)



Amortization
      of actuarial loss and prior service cost

 
 
(17
)
 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
(17
)



Reclassification
      of derivative financial instruments into earnings

 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(378
)
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(378
)



Change
      in fair value of derivative
      financial instruments

 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(738
)
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(738
)



Balance
      at December 31, 2008

 
$
(2,436
)
 
$
(10
)
 
$
(876
)
 
$
145
 
 
$
(3,177
)





As of
December 31, 2008, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months it
will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings
approximately $711 million in net losses (based on prices as of December 31,
2008) related to its fuel derivative hedges, including losses from terminated
contracts with a bankrupt counterparty and unwound trades as described in Note 7
“Financial Instruments and Risk Management”


 



 






 



13.         Earnings (Loss) Per
Share

The
following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings (loss)
per share (in millions, except per share amounts):





 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



    
      Numerator:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



     Net
      earnings (loss) – numerator for basic earnings (loss) per
      share

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
504
 
 
$
231
 



    
      Interest on senior convertible notes

 
 
-
 
 
 
27
 
 
 
27
 



     Net
      earnings (loss) adjusted for interest on senior convertible notes –
      numerator for diluted earnings per share

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
 531
 
 
$
 258
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Denominator:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



     Denominator
      for basic earnings (loss) per share – weighted average
    shares

 
 
259
 
 
 
245
 
 
 
205
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Effect of dilutive securities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   
         Senior convertible notes

 
 
-
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
32
 



   
         Employee options and shares

 
 
-
 
 
 
34
 
 
 
44
 



   
         Assumed treasury shares purchased

 
 
-
 
 
 
(12
)
 
 
(17
)



    
      Diluted potential common shares

 
 
-
 
 
 
54
 
 
 
59
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Denominator for diluted earnings loss per share – weighted-average
      shares

 
 
259
 
 
 
299
 
 
 
264
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Basic earnings (loss) per share

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
2.06
 
 
$
1.13
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Diluted earnings (loss) per share

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
1.78
 
 
$
0.98
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





For the
year ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, approximately 13 million and 7 million
shares related to employee stock options were not added to the denominator
because the options’ exercise prices were greater than the average market price
of the common shares.  Approximately 36 million shares related to the
Company’s convertible notes, employee stock options and deferred stock were not
added to the denominator for the year ended December 31, 2008 because inclusion
of such shares would be antidilutive.

14.         Segment
Reporting

The
Company's operations of American and AMR Eagle are treated as an integrated
route network and the route scheduling system maximizes the operating results of
the Company.  The Company's chief operating decision maker makes
resource allocation decisions to maximize the Company's consolidated financial
results.  Based on the way the Company treats the network and the
manner in which resource allocation decisions are made, the Company has only one
operating segment for financial reporting purposes consisting of the operations
of American and AMR Eagle.

American,
AMR Eagle and the AmericanConnection® airlines serve 250 cities in 40 countries
with, on average, more than 3,400 daily flights. The combined network fleet
numbers approximately 900 aircraft.  American is also one of the
largest scheduled air freight carriers in the world, providing a wide range of
freight and mail services to shippers throughout its system onboard American’s
passenger fleet.  AMR Eagle owns two regional airlines, which do
business as "American Eagle” - American Eagle Airlines, Inc. and Executive
Airlines, Inc.  The American Eagle® carriers provide connecting
service from nine of American's high-traffic cities to smaller markets
throughout the United States, Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean.




 



 






 



14.         Segment Reporting
(Continued)

Revenues
from other segments are below the quantitative threshold for determining
reportable segments and consist primarily of revenues from American Beacon
Advisors, Inc. (divested in 2008) and Americas Ground Services,
Inc.  The difference between the financial information of the
Company’s one reportable segment and the financial information included in the
accompanying consolidated statements of operations and balance sheets as a
result of these entities is not material.

In 2008,
the Company announced that it had reached a definitive agreement with Lighthouse
Holdings, Inc., which is owned by investment funds affiliated with TPG Capital,
L.P. and Pharos Capital Group, LLC for the sale of American Beacon Advisors,
Inc. (American Beacon), its wholly-owned asset management subsidiary. On
September 12, 2008, AMR completed the sale of American Beacon which resulted in
a net gain of $432 million.  The gain on the sale is included in
Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations.  While primarily a cash transaction, the Company also
maintained a minority equity stake in American Beacon.  As the Company has
significant continuing involvement with American Beacon post-sale, AMR does not
account for the disposal of American Beacon as discontinued
operations.

The
Company’s operating revenues by geographic region (as defined by the Department
of Transportation) are summarized below (in millions):






 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



DOT
      Domestic

 
$
14,135
 
 
$
14,179
 
 
$
14,159
 



DOT
      Latin America

 
 
4,927
 
 
 
4,268
 
 
 
4,024
 



DOT
      Atlantic

 
 
3,671
 
 
 
3,556
 
 
 
3,409
 



DOT
      Pacific

 
 
1,033
 
 
 
932
 
 
 
971
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      consolidated revenues

 
$
23,766
 
 
$
22,935
 
 
$
22,563
 






The
Company attributes operating revenues by geographic region based upon the origin
and destination of each flight segment.  The Company’s tangible assets
consist primarily of flight equipment, which are mobile across geographic
markets and, therefore, have not been allocated.

15.         Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited)

Unaudited
summarized financial data by quarter for 2008 and 2007 (in millions, except per
share amounts):





 
      
 

First
Quarter

 
 

Second
      Quarter

 
 

Third
      Quarter

 
 

Fourth
      Quarter

 



2008

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      revenues

 
$
5,697
 
 
$
6,179
 
 
$
6,421
 
 
$
5,469
 



Operating
      income (loss)

 
 
(187
)
 
 
(1,290
)
 
 
(216
)
 
 
(196
)



Net
      earnings (loss)

 
 
(328
)
 
 
(1,448
)
 
 
45
 
 
 
(340
)



Earnings
      (loss) per share:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Basic

 
 
(1.32
)
 
 
(5.77
)
 
 
0.17
 
 
 
(1.22
)



Diluted

 
 
(1.32
)
 
 
(5.77
)
 
 
0.17
 
 
 
(1.22
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2007

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      revenues

 
$
5,427
 
 
$
5,879
 
 
$
5,946
 
 
$
5,683
 



Operating
      income (loss)

 
 
248
 
 
 
467
 
 
 
319
 
 
 
(69
)



Net
      earnings (loss)

 
 
81
 
 
 
317
 
 
 
175
 
 
 
(69
)



Earnings
      (loss) per share:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Basic

 
 
0.35
 
 
 
1.28
 
 
 
0.70
 
 
 
(0.28
)



Diluted

 
 
0.30
 
 
 
1.08
 
 
 
0.61
 
 
 
(0.28
)





The third
quarter 2007 results include a charge of $40 million to correct certain vacation
accruals included in Wages, salaries and benefits expense.  Of this
amount, $30 million is related to the years 2003 through
2006.  







15.         Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited) (Continued)

The
fourth quarter 2007 results include the impact of several items,
including:  a $138 million gain on the sale of AMR’s stake in ARINC
included in Other Income, Miscellaneous – net, a $39 million gain to reflect the
positive impact of the change to an 18-month expiration of AAdvantage miles
included in Passenger revenue, and a $63 million charge associated with the
retirement of 24 MD-80 aircraft and certain other equipment that previously had
been temporarily stored included in Spceial charges.

The
second quarter 2008 results include an impairment charge of $1.1 billion to
write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related
long-lived assets down to their estimated fair values, and a $55 million accrual
for employee severance costs.

The
Company’s third quarter 2008 results include the sale of American Beacon for
total proceeds of $442 million with a net gain of $432 million and $27 million
of special charges due to continued capacity reduction effects.

The
results of the fourth quarter of 2008 were impacted by a pension settlement
charge of $103 million for one of the Company’s defined benefit
plans.




 



 






 



ITEM
9.                 CHANGES
IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL
DISCLOSURE

None.

ITEM
9A.                      CONTROLS
AND PROCEDURES

Management’s
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures

The term
“disclosure controls and procedures” is defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or the Exchange Act. This term refers to
the controls and procedures of a company that are designed to ensure that
information required to be disclosed by a company in the reports that it files
under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within
the time periods specified by the Securities and Exchange Commission. An
evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of the
Company’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief
Financial Officer (CFO), of the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures as of December 31, 2008.  Based on that
evaluation, the Company’s management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that
the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December
31, 2008. During the quarter ending on December 31, 2008, there was no change in
the Company’s internal control over financial reporting that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting.

Management’s
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting

Management
of the Company is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The Company’s internal control over financial
reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.

Because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements. Therefore, even those systems determined to be
effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial
statement preparation and presentation.

Management
assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2008 using the criteria set forth in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission.
Based on this assessment, management believes that, as of December 31,
2008, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective
based on those criteria.

The
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31,
2008, has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, the independent registered
public accounting firm who also audited the Company’s consolidated financial
statements. Ernst & Young LLP’s attestation report on the effectiveness of
the Company’s internal control over financial reporting appears
below.


 
/s/ Gerard J.
Arpey                                                           
Gerard J.
Arpey
Chairman,
President and Chief Executive Officer



/s/ Thomas W.
Horton                                                                           
Thomas W.
Horton
Executive
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer



 



 






 



Report
of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm


The Board
of Directors and Shareholders
AMR
Corporation

We have
audited AMR Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2008, based on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (the COSO criteria). AMR Corporation’s management is responsible for
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying “Management’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting.” Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the
company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our
audit.

We
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over
financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based
upon the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable
basis for our opinion.

A
company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of
the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.

Because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements.  Also, projections of any evaluation
of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

In our
opinion, AMR Corporation maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2008, based on the
COSO criteria.

We also
have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated balance sheets of AMR
Corporation as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 and the related consolidated
statements of operations, stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flows for each
of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2008 of AMR Corporation and
related financial statement schedule and our report dated February 18, 2009
expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.



/s/
Ernst & Young LLP


Dallas,
Texas
February
18, 2009


 



 






 








PART
      III





ITEM
10.                      DIRECTORS
AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.  Information concerning the
executive officers is included in Part I of this report on page 25 and
information concerning the Company’s code of ethics in included in Part I of
this report on page 10.

ITEM
11.                     EXECUTIVE
COMPENSATION

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.

ITEM
12.                     SECURITY
OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT

Equity Compensation Plan
Information




 
      
 



 
 
Number
      of securities to be issued upon exercise of outstanding options, warrants
      and rights

 
 



 
 
 
 
Weighted-average
      exercise price of outstanding options, warrants and rights

 
 

Number
      of securities remaining available for future issuance under equity
      compensation plans (excluding securities reflected in the first
      column)

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equity
      compensation plans approved by security holders

 
 
 13,805,948
 
 
$
23.88
 
 
 
-
**


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equity
      compensation plans not approved by security holders

 
 
13,809,992
*
 
$
 5.66
 
 
 
   614,228
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total

 
 
27,615,940
 
 
$
14.77
 
 
 
614,228
 









 
      


*


Represents
      13,809,992 options granted under the 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan
      (the ESIP).  The ESIP was implemented in accordance with the
      rules of the New York Stock
Exchange.








 
      


**


Additional
      shares may become available for future use as certain employee stock
      options are settled as SSARs.





See Note
9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding
the equity compensation plans included above.

The
information required by Item 403 of Regulation S-K is incorporated herein by
reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting
of stockholders on May 20, 2009.

ITEM
13.                     CERTAIN
RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.



 



 






 



ITEM
14.                      PRINCIPAL
ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.






PART
      IV





ITEM
15.                                                      EXHIBITS
AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES






(a)


(1)


The
      following financial statements and Independent Auditors’ Report are filed
      as part of this report:










 
      
 

Page

 


 
      
 
 
 



        Report
      of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

 
 
51
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Statements of Operations for the Years Ended
        December 31,
      2008, 2007 and 2006

 
 
 52
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Balance Sheets at December 31, 2008 and 2007

 
 
53-54
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended
        December 31,
      2008, 2007 and 2006

 
 
 55
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit) for the Years
      Ended
        December 31,
      2008, 2007 and 2006

 
 
 56
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Notes
      to Consolidated Financial Statements

 
 
57-85
 









 
      


(2)


The
      following financial statement schedule is filed as part of this
      report:








 
      
 

Page

 


 
      
 
 
 



        Schedule II
      Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves

 
 
103
 









 
      


Schedules
      not included have been omitted because they are not applicable or because
      the required information is included in the consolidated financial
      statements or notes thereto.







 



 






 







 
      


(3)


Exhibits
      required to be filed by Item 601 of Regulation S-K. (Where the amount of
      securities authorized to be issued under any of AMR's long-term debt
      agreements does not exceed 10 percent of AMR's assets, pursuant to
      paragraph (b)(4) of Item 601 of Regulation S-K, in lieu of filing such as
      an exhibit, AMR hereby agrees to furnish to the Commission upon request a
      copy of any agreement with respect to such long-term debt.) The
      exhibits include amendments to the following agreements approved by the
      Board of Directors of AMR on November 17, 2008, to be effective as of
      January 1, 2005 (unless otherwise specified), which were amended to
      ensure compliance with Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
      as amended, and other tax regulations:  Trust Agreement Under
      Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan $uper $aver Plus Plan, as amended
      and restated as of June 1, 2007 (filed as Exhibit 10.129), Trust Agreement
      Under Supplemental Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
      Inc., as amended and restated as of June 1, 2007 (filed as Exhibit
      10.127), Supplemental Employee Retirement Program for Officers of American
      Airlines Inc., as amended and restated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as
      Exhibit 10.128), First Amendment to AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit
      Incentive Plan, dated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.4, AMR
      Corporation 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan, as amended as of January
      1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.151), AMR Corporation Amended and Restated
      Directors Pension Benefits Plan, effective as of January 1, 2005 (filed as
      Exhibit 10.149), Amended and Restated Air Transportation Plan for
      Non-Employee Directors of AMR Corporation, effective as of January 1, 2005
      (filed as Exhibit 10.150), AMR Corporation Procedures for Deferral of
      Board Retainers and Fees (an amendment and restatement of the Directors
      Stock Equivalent Purchase Plan), as amended and restated as of January 1,
      2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.135), AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive
      Plan (filed as Exhibit 10.142), First Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994
      Directors Stock Incentive Plan, dated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as
      Exhibit 10.152), Form of Amendment to Career Equity Program Deferred Stock
      Award Agreement for Employees and Senior Officers, dated as of January 1,
      2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.105), Form of Amendment to Career Equity Program
      Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Employees and Senior Officers, dated as
      of January 1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.106), Form of Amendment Executive
      Termination Benefits, dated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit
      10.124).









 
      


Exhibit









 
      


             
       3.1


Restated
      Certificate of Incorporation of AMR, incorporated by reference to AMR’s
      Registration Statement on Form S-4, file number
  33-55191.









3.2  


Bylaws
      of AMR Corporation, amended and restated as of January 20, 2009,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to AMR’s report on Form 8-K on
      January 23, 2009.









3.3  


Amendments
      to the AMR Corporation Certificate of Incorporation, incorporated by
      reference to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended
      September 30, 2003.









10.1  


Compensation
      and Benefit Agreement relative to the retirement of Robert L. Crandall,
      between AMR and Robert L. Crandall, dated September 18, 1998, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 1998.









10.2  


Description
      of informal arrangement relating to deferral of payment of directors'
      fees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10(c)(11) to American's
      Registration Statement No. 2-76709.









10.3  


AMR
      Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan, as amended, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the
      quarterly period ended June 30, 2005; the successor to the AMR Corporation
      1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference
      to Exhibit 10.9 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 1996, and the AMR Corporation 1999 Directors’ Stock Appreciation
      Rights Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  1999.









10.4  


First
      Amendment to AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan, dated as
      of January 1, 2005.




















10.5  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed on July
      19, 2002.









10.6  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 16, 2002 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2002.









10.7  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.8  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.9  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.8 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2005.









10.10  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2006.









10.11  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.10 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.12  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann.









10.13  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of April 30, 2003 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  2003.









10.14  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.15  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.17 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.16  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      David L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.17  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      David L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.18  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.19  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and David
      L. Boren















10.20  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of February 19, 1998, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1997.









10.21  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 13, 1999, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.19 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1998.









10.22  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2000, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1999.









10.23  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 22, 2001, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2000.









10.24  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed
      on July 19, 2002.









10.25  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 13, 2002 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.28 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.









10.26  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.27  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.28  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.29  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 21, 2006 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.33  to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 2006.









10.30  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 21, 2006 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.34  to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 2006.









10.31  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.28  to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 2007.









10.32  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina.









10.33  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of April 30, 2003 between AMR and Ann M.
      Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  2003.









10.34  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.24 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.















10.35  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.36  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.37  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.44 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2006.




 




10.38  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.40 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.39  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos.









10.40  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of April 30, 2003 between AMR and Michael
      A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  2003.









10.41  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.42  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.34 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.43  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.41 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.44  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.45  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.46 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007









10.46  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles.









10.47  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 19, 2001, between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2000.









10.48  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed
      on July 19, 2002.









10.49  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2002 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.















10.50  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.30 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.51  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.39 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.52  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.47 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.53  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.56 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.54  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.54 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.55  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell.









10.56  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.48 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2005.









10.57  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.58 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2006.









10.58  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.57 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.59  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson.









10.60  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of July 16, 1997, between AMR and Judith
      Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.22 to AMR’s report on Form
      10-K for the year ended December 31,
1997.









10.61  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of February 19, 1998, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1997.









10.62  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 7, 1999, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.30 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1998.









10.63  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2000, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1999.









10.64  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 22, 2001, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2000.
























10.65  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed on July
      19, 2002.









10.66  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 20, 2002 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.









10.67  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.68  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.53 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.69  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.64 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.70  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.69 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.71  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.69 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.72  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin.









10.73  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.65 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.74  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.66 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.75  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.72 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.76  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.73 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.77  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose.









10.78  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed
      on July 19, 2002.









10.79  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 18, 2002 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.















10.80  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.45 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.81  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.57 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.82  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.71 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.83  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.78 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.84  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.80 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.85  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach.









10.86  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 15, 2008 between AMR and Rajat
      K. Gupta, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.81 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2008.









10.87  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Rajat
      K. Gupta.









10.88  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 15, 2008 between AMR and
      Alberto Ibargüen,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.82 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31, 2008.









10.89  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Alberto Ibargüen.









10.90  


Current
      form of Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as
      amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.64 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.91  


Current
      form of Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock Incentive
      Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s report on Form
      10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.92  


Current
      form of 2003 Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive
      Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended September 30,
      2003.









10.93  


Current
      form of 2004 Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive
      Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.64 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.94  


Current
      form of 2005 Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive
      Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
      2005.























10.95  


Current
      form of 2003 Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock
      Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.96  


Current
      form of 2004 Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock
      Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.66 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.97  


Current
      form of 2005 Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock
      Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2005.









10.98  


Current
      form of Amendment of Stock Option Agreements under the 1998 Long-Term
      Incentive Plan to Add Stock Appreciation Rights, incorporated by reference
      to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended September 30,
      2006.









10.99  


Current
      form of Amendment of Stock Option Agreements under the 1998 Long-Term
      Incentive Plan to Add Stock Appreciation Rights, incorporated by reference
      to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended September 30,
      2006.









10.100  


Career
      Performance Shares, Deferred Stock Award Agreement between AMR Corporation
      and Gerard J. Arpey dated as of July 25, 2005, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.6 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly
      period ended June 30, 2005.









10.101  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Corporate
      Officers under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.41 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.102  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for
      non-officers under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.42 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.103  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Senior
      Officers under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.42(a) to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 1998.









10.104  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Employees
      under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to
      Exhibit 10.44 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      1999.









10.105  


Form
      of amendment to Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for
      Employees and Senior Officers dated as of January 1,
  2005.









10.106  


Form
      of amendment to Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for
      Employees and Senior Officers dated as of January 1,
  2005.









10.107  


Current
      form of 2006 Deferred Share Award Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2006.









10.108  


Current
      form of 2007 Deferred Share Award Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2007









10.109  


Current
      form of 2008 Deferred Share Award Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.2 to AMR’s report
      on Form 8-K on May 22, 2008.















10.110  


Current
      form of Stock Appreciation Right Agreement under the 1998 Long Term
      Incentive Plan, as Amended (with awards to executive officers noted),
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for
      the quarterly period ended June 30,
2006.









10.111  


Current
      form of Stock Appreciation Right Agreement under the 1998 Long Term
      Incentive Plan, as Amended (with awards to executive officers noted),
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for
      the quarterly period ended June 30,
2007.









10.112  


Current
      form of Stock Appreciation Right Agreement under the 1998 Long Term
      Incentive Plan, as Amended (with awards to executive officers noted),
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to AMR’s report on Form 8-K for
      on May 22, 2008.









10.113  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Gerard J. Arpey, dated May 21, 1998, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.61 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.114  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Peter M. Bowler, dated May 21, 1998, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.63 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.115  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Daniel P. Garton, dated May 21, 1998, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.66 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 1998.









10.116  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Monte E. Ford, dated November 15, 2000, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.74 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2000.









10.117  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Henry C. Joyner, dated January 19, 2000,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.74 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31,
1999.









10.118  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and William K. Ris, Jr., dated October 20, 1999,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.79 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31,
1999.









10.119  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Gary F. Kennedy dated February 3, 2003, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.55 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2002.









10.120  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Robert W. Reding dated May 20, 2003, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.71 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 2003.









10.121  


Employment
      agreement between AMR, American Airlines and William K. Ris, Jr. dated
      November 11, 1999, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.73 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.122  


Employment
      agreement between AMR, American Airlines and Robert W. Reding dated May
      21, 2003, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.94 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.






 



 






 



 




10.123  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Jeffrey J. Brundage dated April 1, 2004,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for
      the quarterly period ended March 31,
2004.









10.124  


Form
      of Amendment to Executive Termination Benefits Agreement dated as of
      January 1, 2005.









10.125  


Employment
      agreement between AMR, American Airlines and Thomas W. Horton dated March
      29, 2006, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s current
      report on Form 8-K dated March 31,
2006.









10.126  


Amendment
      of employment agreement between AMR, American Airlines and Thomas W.
      Horton dated July 15, 2008, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to
      AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
      2008.









10.127  


Supplemental
      Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc., as
      amended and restated as of January 1,
2005.









10.128  


Trust
      Agreement Under Supplemental Retirement Program for Officers of American
      Airlines, Inc., as amended and restated as of June 1,
  2007.









10.129  


Trust
      Agreement Under Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of
      American Airlines, Inc. Participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, as amended and
      restated as of June 1, 2007.









10.130  


Aircraft
      Purchase Agreement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated October 31, 1997, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.48 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      1997.  Confidential treatment was granted as to a portion of
      this document.









10.131  


Letter
      Agreement dated November 17, 2004 and Purchase Agreement Supplements dated
      January 11, 2005 between the Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc.,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.99 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31, 2004.  Confidential treatment
      was granted as to a portion of these
agreements.









10.132  


Letter
      Agreement between the Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc. dated May
      5, 2005, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to AMR’s report on Form
      10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2005.  Confidential
      treatment was granted as to a portion of this
  agreement.









10.133  


Aircraft
      Purchase Agreement by and between AMR Eagle Holding Corporation and
      Bombardier Inc., dated January 31, 1998, incorporated by reference to
      Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      1997.  Confidential treatment was granted as to a portion of
      this agreement.









10.134  


Amended
      and Restated Credit Agreement dated March 27, 2006, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly
      period ended March 31, 2006.









10.135  


AMR
      Corporation Procedures for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees (an
      amendment and restatement of the Directors Stock Equivalent Purchase
      Plan), as amended and restated as of January 1,
  2005.









10.136  


Current
      form of Deferred Share Award Agreement as Amended and Restated March 29,
      2006 (with awards to executive officers noted), incorporated by reference
      to Exhibit 99.7 to AMR’s current report on Form 8-K dated March 31,
      2006.




 





 




10.137  


2009
      Annual Incentive Plan for American, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      99.1 to AMR’s current report on Form 8-K dated February 3,
      2009.




 




10.138  


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing Company,
      dated as of October 15, 2008. Portions of this Exhibit have been omitted
      and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant
      to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2 of the Securities and
      Exchange Act of 1934, as amended incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.29 to American Airlines, Inc's report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 2008.




 




10.139  


Form
      of 2006-2008 Performance Share Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted) and 2006-2008 Performance Share Plan for Officers and Key
      Employees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2006.









10.140  


Form
      of 2007-2009 Performance Share Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), and 2007-2009 Performance Share Plan for Officers and Key
      Employees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2007.









10.141  


Form
      of 2008-2010 Performance Share Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), and 2008-2010 Performance Share Plan for Officers and Key
      Employees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.3 to AMR’s current
      report on Form 8-K dated  May 22,
  2008.









10.142  


AMR
      Corporation 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as Amended and Restated as of
      January 1, 2005.









10.143  


Amendment
      of Stock Option Agreements Under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan to Add
      Stock Appreciation Rights, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.132 to
      AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      2006.









10.144  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated August 17, 2007. Portions of this Exhibit have been omitted
      and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant
      to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2 of the Securities and
      Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.133 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      2007.









10.145  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated November 20, 2007.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.134 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.









10.146  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated December 10, 2007.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.135 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.




 





















10.147  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated January 20, 2008.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.136 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.









10.148  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated February 11, 2008.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.137 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.









10.149  


AMR
      Corporation Amended and Restated Directors Pension Benefits Plan,
      effective as of January 1, 2005.









10.150  


Amended
      and Restated Air Transportation Plan for Non-Employee Directors of AMR
      Corporation, effective as of January 1,
2005.









10.151  


AMR
      Corporation 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan, as amended as of January
      1, 2005.









10.152  


First
      Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, dated as
      of January 1, 2005.










 
      


        
      12


Computation
      of ratio of earnings to fixed charges for the years ended December 31,
      2008, 2007, 2006, 2005 and 2004.









 
      


               
      21  


Significant
      subsidiaries of the registrant as of December 31,
  2008.




 





23  


Consent
      of Independent Registered Public Accounting
  Firm.









31.1  


Certification
      of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Rule
  13a-14(a).









31.2  


Certification
      of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Rule
  13a-14(a).









32  


Certification
      pursuant to Rule 13a-14(b) and section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
      2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of section 1350, chapter 63 of title 18,
      United States Code).







 



 






 



SIGNATURES

Pursuant
to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.


AMR
CORPORATION







By:


/s/  Gerard
      J. Arpey



 
      

Gerard
      J. Arpey



 
      

Chairman,
      President and Chief Executive Officer



 
      

(Principal
      Executive Officer)



 
      
 
      




Date: February
18, 2009



Pursuant
to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates noted:







/s/  Gerard
      J. Arpey

 
      

/s/  Thomas
      W Horton




Gerard
      J. Arpey

 
      

Thomas
      W. Horton




Director,
      Chairman and Chief Executive Officer

 
      

Executive
      Vice President and Chief Financial Officer




(Principal
      Executive Officer)

 
      

(Principal
      Financial and Accounting
Officer)

















/s/  John
      W. Bachmann

 
      

/s/  Michael
      A. Miles




John
      W. Bachmann, Director

 
      

Michael
      A. Miles, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/  David
      L. Boren

 
      

/s/  Philip
      J. Purcell




David
      L. Boren, Director

 
      

Philip
      J. Purcell, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/  Armando
      M. Codina

 
      

/s/  Ray
      M. Robinson




Armando
      M. Codina, Director

 
      

Ray
      M. Robinson, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/
      Rajat K. Gupta

 
      

/s/  Judith
      Rodin




Rajat
      K. Gupta, Director

 
      

Judith
      Rodin, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/
      Alberto Ibargüen

 
      

/s/  Matthew
      K. Rose




Alberto
      Ibargüen,
      Director

 
      

Matthew
      K. Rose, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/  Ann
      McLaughlin Korologos

 
      

/s/  Roger
      T. Staubach




Ann
      McLaughlin Korologos, Director

 
      

Roger
      T. Staubach, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



Date: February
      18, 2009

 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


























AMR
CORPORATION
Schedule
II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves
 (in
millions)




 

 
 
 
 
Balance
at
      beginning
 of year


 
 
 
Changes
      charged to statement of operations accounts


 
 
 
 
 
 
Payments


 
 
 
 
 
Write-offs
      (net of recoveries)


 
 
 
 
Sales,
retirements
and
      transfers


 
 
 
 
 
Balance
      at
      end
      
of
      year












 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Year
      ended December 31, 2008

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
obsolescence
      of
      
inventories


          $ 
      

424
 
 
$
101
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
(37
)
 
$
488
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
uncollectible
      
accounts

 
41
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Reserves
      for 
environmental
remediation
      costs

 
21
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
(5
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
18
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Year
      ended December 31, 2007

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for
obsolescence
      of 
inventories

        $
411
 
 
$
27
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
(14
)
 
$
424
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
uncollectible
      
accounts

 
45
 
 
 
(1
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Reserves
      for 
environmental
remediation
      costs

 
33
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(7
)
 
 
(5
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
21
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Year
      ended December 31, 2006

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
obsolescence
      of
      
inventories

          
      $
410
 
 
$
24
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
(23
)
 
$
411
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
uncollectible
      
accounts

 
60
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(25
)
 
 
7
 
 
 
45
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Reserves
      for 
environmental
remediation
      costs

 
40
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
(9
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
33
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      










EX-10.4
2
ex104.htm
DIRECTORS UNIT INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex104.htm







FIRST
AMENDMENT
 
TO
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
2004
DIRECTORS UNIT INCENTIVE PLAN
 
THIS
FIRST AMENDMENT TO AMR CORPORATION 2004 DIRECTORS UNIT INCENTIVE PLAN, is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, by AMR Corporation (the
“Company”).
 
PREAMBLE
 
The
purposes of the AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan (the “Plan”)
are to enable AMR Corporation (the “Company”) to attract, retain and motivate
the best qualified directors and to enhance a long-term mutuality of interest
between the directors and stockholders of the Company by providing the directors
with an interest in the economic well-being of the Company as evidenced by the
price of the Company’s Common Stock.  Since the adoption of the Plan,
section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) has
been enacted and requires amendment of the Plan.  Such required
amendments are accomplished by adoption of this instrument.
 
AMENDMENTS
 
1.           Section
2(i) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“(i)           “Beneficiary”
shall mean a person designated by an Eligible Director who is or may be entitled
to a benefit under this Plan in the event of the death of the Eligible
Director.  If no Beneficiary is designated, or if the designated
Beneficiary is not then living, benefits will be paid to the Eligible Director’s
spouse, and if the spouse is not then living, to the Eligible Director’s
estate.  Each Eligible Director shall have the right to designate the
Beneficiary selected in writing.”
 
2.           Section
6(b) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Payment
shall not be accelerated to an earlier date, except in the case of early
termination of the Plan pursuant to Section 10(a) of the Plan.  For
purposes of this Section 6(b) in the event of death of the Eligible Director,
the Eligible Director shall be deemed to have ceased to be a member of the Board
as of the date of death.  An Eligible Director shall also be deemed to
have ceased to be a member of the Board at the end of the Eligible Director’s
term of office if the Eligible Director is not nominated or elected to another
term, or upon the date of resignation or removal from office, without continuing
in service as an employee or independent contractor of the Company or any
corporation owned in whole or in part by the Company.  In the event
that an Eligible Director continues in any such service, payment shall be
delayed until the former Eligible Director sustains a “separation from service”
as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
3.           Section
10(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“Any
payment on termination of the Plan shall be made only in accordance with
Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
4.           Except
as specifically amended herein, the Plan as heretofore in effect shall remain in
full force and effect.
 
This
First Amendment to AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, and is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 

 
By:                                                                           Its:  Corporate
Secretary
 

 

 

 

 

 
 




EX-10.12
3
ex1012.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - JOHN W BACHMANN

ex1012.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr. John
W. Bachmann
Edward
Jones
12555
Manchester Road
St.
Louis, Mo. 63131


Dear
John:
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to
Katherine Bachmann.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will
be made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary






Accepted
and agreed:

/s/
John W. Bachmann          

John W.
Bachmann


Date



EX-10.19
4
ex1019.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - DAVID L BOREN

ex1019.htm







 

December
4, 2007




Mr. David
L. Boren
Office of
the President
University
of Oklahoma
660
Parrington Oval, Room 110
Norman,
OK 73019

Dear
David:

This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director=s
fees in 2008.

1.           All
director=s
fees and retainers (AFees@)  payable
to you in connection with your service on the boards of directors (including
committees of such boards) of AMR Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for
the period January 1, 2008 through December 31, 2008 , will be deferred and paid
to you in accordance with this letter agreement.

2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Directors'
Stock Equivalent Purchase Plan, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit A
(the APlan@).

3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued in 2008 pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash
and paid to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent
Units by the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market
value”) during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and
any affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Molly
Boren.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.


 
 




 



 






 






If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.

Very
truly yours,

/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly


Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary


Accepted
and agreed:




__/s/ David L.
Boren_     _______
David L.
Boren


_December 6,
2007  __________
Date



EX-10.32
5
ex1032.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ARMANDO M CODINA

ex1032.htm








December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Armando M. Codina
Chairman
Flagler
Development Group
2855
Lejeune Road,  4th
Floor
Coral
Gables, FL 33134


Dear
Armando:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to
Margarita Codina.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will
be made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary



Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Armando M. Codina        
Armando
M. Codina




EX-10.39
6
ex1039.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ANN M KOROLOGOS

ex1039.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mrs. Ann
M. Korologos
3150
South Street, NW, Apt. 2A
Washington,
D.C. 20007

 
Dear
Ann:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Tom
Korologos.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Ann M. Korologos       
 
Ann M.
Korologos


Date



EX-10.46
7
ex1046.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - MICHAEL A MILES

ex1046.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Michael A. Miles
1350 Lake
Road
Lake
Forest, IL 60045

 
Dear
Mike:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Pamela
Miles.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Michael A. Miles       
Michael
A. Miles




EX-10.55
8
ex1055.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - PHILIP J PURCELL

ex1055.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Philip J. Purcell
227 West
Monroe Street
Suite
5045
Chicago,
IL 60606

 
Dear
Phil:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Anne
Purcell.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/
Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Philip J. Purcell       
Philip J.
Purcell




EX-10.59
9
ex1059.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - RAY M ROBINSON

ex1059.htm



 

December
4, 2008
 
Mr. Ray
M. Robinson
Citizens
Trust Bank
75
Piedmont Avenue
Atlanta,
GA 30303

Dear
Ray:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Arlane
Robinson.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/ Ray
M. Robinson
Ray M.
Robinson




EX-10.72
10
ex1072.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - JUDITH RODIN

ex1072.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Judith
Rodin, PhD.
President
The
Rockefeller Foundation
420 Fifth
Avenue
New York
NY  10018
 
Dear
Judith:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Pursuant
to the Procedures for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and
restated (a copy of which is attached as Exhibit A), interest will be accrued on
the amounts to be paid on a deferred basis pursuant to paragraph 1 above, from
the date such fees would otherwise have been paid to the date actually paid, at
the prime rate which JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. from time to time charges in New
York for 90-day loans to responsible commercial borrowers, such interest to be
compounded monthly.
 
3.           On
the 30th
business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation, and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the total amount
to be paid on a deferred basis; plus the aggregate amount of interest accrued
thereon will be paid to you in a lump sum distribution.  Payment
cannot be accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the amounts outlined in Paragraph 3 above shall be paid
to the Trustees under your Revocable Agreement of Trust, dated September 15,
1997, as amended February 20, 2004, Judith Rodin Settlor and
Trustee.  The payments contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

Very
truly yours,
 
 
/s/
Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary
 

 

 
Accepted
and agreed:
 


/s/
Judith Rodin

Judith
Rodin



EX-10.77
11
ex1077.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - MATTHEW K ROSE

ex1077.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Matthew K. Rose
Chairman
Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Corp.
2650 Lou
Menk Drive
Fort
Worth, TX  76131

 
Dear
Matt:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Lisa
Rose.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/
Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Matthew K. Rose
Matthew
K. Rose

 



EX-10.85
12
ex1085.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ROGER T STAUBACH

ex1085.htm




December
4, 2008
 
Mr. Roger
T. Staubach
Executive
Chairman, Americas
Jones,
Lang, LaSalle Inc.
15601
Dallas Parkway
Suite
400
Addison,
TX 75001

Dear
Roger:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Marianne
Staubach.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/ Roger
T. Staubach
Roger T.
Staubach




EX-10.87
13
ex1087.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - RAJAT K GUPTA

ex1087.htm




December
4, 2008
 
Rajat K.
Gupta
McKinsey
& Company, Inc.
3
Landmark Square
Suite
100, 21st
Floor
Stamford,
CT  06901

 
Dear
Rajat:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Anita
Mattoo Gupta.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be
made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/ Rajat
K. Gupta
Rajat K.
Gupta




EX-10.89
14
ex1089.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ALBERTO IBARGUEN

ex1089.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Alberto Ibargüen
John S.
& James L. Knight Foundation
200 S.
Biscayne Blvd., Suite 3300
Miami,
FL  33131-2349

Dear
Alberto:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Alberto
Ibargüen Revocable Trust.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph
4 will be made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Alberto Ibarguen
Alberto
Ibarguen




EX-10.105
15
ex10105.htm
CAREER EQUITY PROGRAM DEFERRED STOCK AWARD, AMENDED

ex10105.htm







AMENDMENT
TO
CAREER
EQUITY PROGRAM
DEFERRED STOCK AWARD
AGREEMENT(S)
 
This Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the
Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement(s) dated [INSERT DATE(S)] (as amended,
the “Agreement(s)”) is made this 17th day of November, 2008.
 
WHEREAS, AMR Corporation (the
“Corporation”) and [NAME] (the “Employee”),
employee number [EMPLOYEE
NUMBER], have previously entered into the Agreement(s);
 
WHEREAS, effective January 1, 2005, the
Agreement(s) became subject to certain requirements of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and the regulations and
other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to guidance issued
under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) may be amended on or before
December 31, 2008, to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the Code
and the regulations and other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation and the
Employee wish to amend such Agreement(s) to comply with the applicable
requirements of section 409A of the Code and the governing regulations and other
guidance issued thereunder;
 
NOW THEREFORE, in order to avoid
imposition of the penalties under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) are
hereby amended as follows:
 
1.           The
last sentence in the Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Grant of Award”, is
deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“To the
extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not vested (within the
meaning of section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”)) as of January 1, 2005 (“Post-409A Shares”), the vesting, payment and
deferral of such Post-409A Shares shall be made in accordance with the
provisions herein which specifically relate to Post-409A Shares.  Such
Post-409A Shares shall be comprised of the shares of Stock which the Employee
could not receive pursuant to the vesting schedule described herein by virtue of
a Normal Retirement or Early Retirement effective as of December 31,
2004.  For instance, if the Employee had attained age 57 as of
December 31, 2004, and could have retired (by virtue of an Early Retirement) at
that time, 9% of the shares of Stock covered by the Award would be treated as
Post-409A Shares.  Except as otherwise provided in the Section of the
Agreements entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, to the extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not
Post-409A Shares, the vesting, payment and deferral of such shares shall be made
in accordance with the applicable provisions herein, which do not otherwise
relate specifically to Post-409A Shares.”
 
2.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting
–Normal Retirement or Early Retirement”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this
Section; provided that the Employee’s Retirement or Early Retirement constitutes
a “separation from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or
successor guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the
Agreement entitled, “Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to the
Employee not later than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the Employee’s Retirement or
Early Retirement occurred.”
 
3.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Death or Disability”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment due to Disability, such
termination of employment constitutes a “separation from service” for purposes
of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor guidance
thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement entitled,
“Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares, which are payable upon the termination of
Employee’s employment due to Disability, shall be issued and delivered not later
than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year immediately following
the calendar year in which such termination occurred.”
 
4.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Termination Not for Cause”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment for reasons described in
this Section, the Employee’s termination of employment constitutes a “separation
from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement
entitled, “Section
409A Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the
Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to
the Employee in accordance with the preceding paragraph of this
Section.”
 
5.           The
Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, is deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“Vesting – Change in
Control.  In the event of a “Change in Control” (as defined in
the Corporation’s 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, that is in effect
as of December 31, 2008, and any successor thereto), shares under the Award
(i.e., all Post-409A
Shares and non-Post-409A Shares) shall vest in accordance with the 1998 Plan or
its successor.  Share certificates for the number of shares covered by
the vested portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall
be issued and delivered to the Employee not later than the 15th day of the third
month of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such
change in control occurred.”
 
6.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Elective
Deferrals”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Employee will not be permitted to make any change in the time
of payment of the portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A
Shares.”
 
7.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the first paragraph in the
Subsection of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Performance Return
Payments”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, for ROI measurement periods ending on or after January 1, 2005,
the Payment Date for a particular Performance Return Payment shall occur during
the calendar year immediately following the close of the last fiscal year of the
particular ROI measurement period that relates to such Performance Return
Payment.”
 
8.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the last paragraph in the
Subsection of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Performance Return
Payments”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Employee may not elect to defer receipt of a Performance
Return Payment that relates to a ROI measurement period ending on or after
January 1, 2005.”
 
9.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Subsection of the
Agreement(s) entitled, “Dividend
Equivalents”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, dividend equivalent payments occurring on or after January 1,
2005, shall automatically be deferred and treated as additional shares of
Deferred Stock, subject to the terms and conditions that apply to the related
shares of Deferred Stock with respect to which such dividend equivalents were
originally payable.”
 
10.           The
following new Section is added as the last Section of the Agreement(s) to read
as follows:
 
“Section 409A
Compliance.  The Agreement, as amended, is intended to be
exempt from and/or comply with the requirements (and not otherwise be subject to
the interest and penalty taxes of) section 409A of the Code and the regulations
and other guidance issued thereunder, and shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with that intent.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the
event there is a failure to comply with section 409A of the Code, the Board
shall have the discretion to accelerate the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares, but only to the extent of the amount required to be included in income
as a result of such failure.  Amendments to the Agreement may be made
by the Corporation, without the Employee’s consent, in order to ensure
compliance with section 409A of the Code and the regulations and other guidance
issued thereunder.
 
Notwithstanding
any provision herein to the contrary, if the Employee is a “specified employee”
pursuant to Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or successor guidance thereto, any
payment of Post-409A Shares on account of his/her Normal Retirement, Early
Retirement or involuntary termination not for Cause shall be delayed until the
earlier of: (i) the six-month anniversary of the date of separation from
employment due to Normal Retirement, Early Retirement or involuntary termination
not for Cause, or (ii) the date of the Employee’s death.”
 
11.           The
following new sentence is added at the end of the first paragraph of Schedule A
of the Agreement(s) to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, effective October 3, 2004, the Chairman or Committee, as the case
may be, only shall change such percentage prior to the commencement of a
particular ROI measurement period and such change shall apply on a prospective
basis to such ROI measurement period and other ROI measurement periods
commencing thereafter.”
 
12.           The
first sentence of the second paragraph of Schedule A of the Agreement(s) is
amended by deleting said sentence in its entirety and substituted in its place
is the following:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, effective January 1, 2005, the price of the shares described in
this paragraph will be equal to the “Fair Market Value” (as defined in the
Corporation’s 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, that is in effect as of
December 31, 2008, and any successor thereto) of the Stock as of the date the
ROI is calculated.”
 
13.           Except
as amended by the Amendment, the remaining terms and provisions of the
Agreement(s) shall remain in full force and effect.  Nothing in the
Amendment shall be deemed to cause a termination of the
Agreement(s).
 
IN
WITNESS HEREOF, the Employee and the Corporation have caused Amendment to be
executed as of the date first written above.
 
EMPLOYEE                                                                                     AMR
CORPORATION
 

 

 

[NAME]                                                                                            Kenneth
W. Wimberly
  Corporate
Secretary



EX-10.106
16
ex10106.htm
CAREER EQUITY PROGRAM DEFERRED STOCK AWARD, AMENDED

ex10106.htm











 
      


AMENDMENT
      TO




CAREER
EQUITY PROGRAM
DEFERRED STOCK AWARD
AGREEMENT(S)
 
This Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the
Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement(s) dated [INSERT DATE(S)] (as amended,
the “Agreement(s)”) is made this 17th day of November, 2008.
 
WHEREAS, AMR Corporation (the
“Corporation”) and [NAME] (the “Employee”),
employee number [EMPLOYEE
NUMBER], have previously entered into the Agreement(s);
 
WHEREAS, effective January 1, 2005, the
Agreement(s) became subject to certain requirements of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and the regulations and
other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to guidance issued
under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) must be amended on or before
December 31, 2008, to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the Code
and the regulations and other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation and the
Employee wish to amend such Agreement(s) to comply with the applicable
requirements of section 409A of the Code and the governing regulations and other
guidance issued thereunder;
 
NOW THEREFORE, in order to avoid
imposition of the penalties under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) are
hereby amended as follows:
 
1.           The
last sentence in the Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Grant of Award”, is
deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“To the
extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not vested (within the
meaning of section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”)) as of January 1, 2005 (“Post-409A Shares”), the vesting, payment and
deferral of such Post-409A Shares shall be made in accordance with the
provisions herein which specifically relate to Post-409A Shares.  Such
Post-409A Shares shall be comprised of the shares of Stock which the Employee
could not receive pursuant to the vesting schedule described herein by virtue of
a Normal Retirement or Early Retirement effective as of December 31,
2004.  For instance, if the Employee had attained age 57 as of
December 31, 2004, and could have retired (by virtue of an Early Retirement) at
that time, 9% of the shares of Stock covered by the Award would be treated as
Post-409A Shares.  Except as otherwise provided in the Section of the
Agreements entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, to the extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not
Post-409A Shares, the vesting, payment and deferral of such shares shall be made
in accordance with the applicable provisions herein, which do not otherwise
relate specifically to Post-409A Shares.”
 
2.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting
–Normal Retirement or Early Retirement”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this
Section; provided that the Employee’s Retirement or Early Retirement constitutes
a “separation from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or
successor guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the
Agreement entitled, “Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to the
Employee not later than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the Employee’s Retirement or
Early Retirement occurred.”
 
3.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Death or Disability”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment due to Disability, such
termination of employment constitutes a “separation from service” for purposes
of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor guidance
thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement entitled,
“Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares, which are payable upon the termination of
Employee’s employment due to Disability, shall be issued and delivered not later
than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year immediately following
the calendar year in which such termination occurred.”
 
4.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Termination Not for Cause”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment for reasons described in
this Section, the Employee’s termination of employment constitutes a “separation
from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement
entitled, “Section
409A Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the
Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to
the Employee in accordance with the preceding paragraph of this
Section.”
 
5.           The
Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, is deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“Vesting – Change in
Control.  In the event of a “Change in Control” (as defined in
the Corporation’s 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, that is in effect
as of December 31, 2008, and any successor thereto), shares under the Award
(i.e., all Post-409A
Shares and non-Post-409A Shares) shall vest in accordance with the 1998 Plan or
its successor.  Share certificates for the number of shares covered by
the vested portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall
be issued and delivered to the Employee not later than the 15th day of the third
month of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such
change in control occurred.”
 
6.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Elective
Deferrals”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Employee will not be permitted to make any change in the time
of payment of the portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A
Shares.”
 
7.           The
following new Section is added as the last Section of the Agreement(s) to read
as follows:
 
“Section 409A
Compliance.  The Agreement, as amended, is intended to be
exempt from and/or comply with the requirements (and not otherwise be subject to
the interest and penalty taxes of) section 409A of the Code and the regulations
and other guidance issued thereunder, and shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with that intent.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the
event there is a failure to comply with section 409A of the Code, the Board
shall have the discretion to accelerate the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares, but only to the extent of the amount required to be included in income
as a result of such failure.  Amendments to the Agreement may be made
by the Corporation, without the Employee’s consent, in order to ensure
compliance with section 409A of the Code and the regulations and other guidance
issued thereunder.
 
Notwithstanding
any provision herein to the contrary, if the Employee is a “specified employee”
in the year of payment pursuant to Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or successor
guidance thereto, any payment of Post-409A Shares on account of his/her Normal
Retirement, Early Retirement or involuntary termination not for Cause shall be
delayed until the first business day after the earlier of: (i) the six-month
anniversary of the date of separation from employment due to Normal Retirement,
Early Retirement or involuntary termination not for Cause, or (ii) the date of
the Employee’s death.”
 
8.           Except
as amended by the Amendment, the remaining terms and provisions of the
Agreement(s) shall remain in full force and effect.  Nothing in the
Amendment shall be deemed to cause a termination of the
Agreement(s).
 
IN
WITNESS HEREOF, the Employee and the Corporation have caused Amendment to be
executed as of the date first written above.
 
EMPLOYEE                                                                                     AMR
CORPORATION
 

 

 

                                                                                      Kenneth
W. Wimberly




EX-10.124
17
ex10124.htm
EXECUTIVE TERMINATION BENEFITS AGREEMENT, AMENDED

ex10124.htm







AMENDMENT
TO
 
EXECUTIVE
TERMINATION BENEFITS AGREEMENT
 
THIS
AMENDMENT TO EXECUTIVE TERMINATION BENEFITS AGREEMENT (the “Amendment”), dated
as of the 17th day of November, 2008, is by and between AMR CORPORATION, a
Delaware corporation, AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC., a Delaware corporation
(collectively, and either of, the “Company”), and  (the
“Executive”).
 
W I T N E
S S E T H:
 
WHEREAS,
the Company and the Executive have heretofore entered into an Executive
Termination Benefits Agreement, including any amendments thereto (the
“Agreement”), addressing issues related to possible Change in Control;
and
 
WHEREAS,
subsequent to the execution of the Agreement, section 409A of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), has been enacted and requires
amendment of the Agreement, which is intended to be accomplished through the
execution of this Amendment, which is effective as of January 1,
2005;
 
NOW
THEREFORE, the Company and the Executive agree that the Agreement is hereby
amended as follows:
 
1.          Section
1 of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following language,
at the end thereof:
 
Notwithstanding
the above, a Change in Control shall be deemed to have occurred only if the
event is also a change in ownership of the Company, or change in effective
control of the Company, or change in ownership of a substantial portion of the
Company’s assets, in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)
or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the specified
percentages in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii) or
successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
2.          Section
3 of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“No
termination of employment shall be deemed to have occurred under this Agreement
unless and until such termination of employment or separation from employment
constitutes a “separation from service” under Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or
successor guidance thereto.”
 
3.          Section
4(a) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence, at the end thereof:
 
“This
payment is subject to section 409A of the Code and to the payment delay
provision of Section 4(j), with respect to a “specified employee” as described
in section 409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code and Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or
successor guidance thereto.”
 
4.           Section
4(b) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the deletion of all language
following the first sentence thereof and substituting in lieu thereof the
following language:
 
“The
Employee Benefits subject to this Section 4(b) are governed by terms of the
applicable Employee Benefit plans not in conflict with this Section 4(b), may
not be liquidated or exchanged for any other benefit, and the amount of any such
benefits provided in one taxable year of the Executive shall not affect the
amount payable in any subsequent taxable year of the Executive.  The
Company will pay the cost of such Employee Benefits, some portion or all of
which may be taxable to the Executive, together with an additional amount such
that after payment by the Executive, or his dependents or beneficiaries, as the
case may be, of all taxes that may be imposed on the recipient of such Employee
Benefits, the recipient retains an amount equal to such taxes.  Any
amount paid as a cash reimbursement shall be paid not later than the last day of
the taxable year of the Executive following the taxable year of the Executive in
which the expense was incurred.  Any tax reimbursement under this
Section 4(b) must be paid not later than the end of the taxable year of the
Executive following the taxable year of the Executive in which the Executive
paid the relevant taxes.  The benefits or cost thereof payable under
the applicable Employee Benefit plans will be reduced to the extent comparable
welfare benefits are actually received by the Executive from another employer
during the Continuation Period (i.e. Company coverage shall be “secondary”) and
any such benefits actually received by the Executive shall be reported by the
Executive to the Company.”
 
5.          Section
4(c) of the Agreement is hereby amended and restated in the entirety, to provide
as follows:
 
“Retirement
Benefits
 
If the
Executive is not completely vested in the Executive's currently accrued benefits
under the Company's applicable Retirement Benefit Plan and Supplemental
Executive Retirement Plan (“SERP”) in effect as of the date of Change in Control
(collectively, the “Plans”), regardless of the Executive’s actual vesting
service credit thereunder, an amount shall be payable under this Section
4(c).  In addition to such amount, the Executive shall be deemed to
earn service credit for benefit calculation purposes under the SERP for the
Continuation Period described in Section 4(b).  The benefits to be
paid pursuant to the SERP shall be calculated as though the Executive's
compensation rate for each of the 5 years immediately preceding his retirement
equaled the sum of Base Pay plus Incentive Pay. Any benefits payable pursuant to
this Section 4(c) that are not payable out of the Plans for any reason
(including but not limited to any applicable benefit limitations under the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended, or any restrictions
relating to the qualification of the Company's applicable Retirement Benefit
Plan under section 401(a) of the Code), shall be paid directly by the Company
out of its general assets.  Any amount payable under this Section 4(c)
that is not paid under the Plans due to the fact the Participant is not fully
vested will be calculated as required under the SERP for payment of SERP
benefits (including calculation, time and form of payment).  If the
Executive is a “specified employee”, as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-1(i) or successor guidance thereto, on the date of the Executive’s
separation from employment, payment of the amount described in this Section 4(c)
shall be subject to Section 4(j).”
 
6.          Section
4(d) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the by the addition of the following
two sentences, at the end thereof:
 
“Payment
under this Section 4(d) for expenses shall be made not later than the last day
of the taxable year of the Executive following the taxable year of the Executive
in which the expenses were incurred.  Payments for tax reimbursement
shall be made not later than the end of the first taxable year of the Executive
following the year in which the tax payment was made.”
 
7.          Section
4(e) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence, at the end thereof:
 
“Payment
for such services will be made not later than the end of the taxable year of the
Executive following the taxable year of the Executive in which the expenses were
incurred.”
 
8.          Section
4(f)(ii) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the insertion of the words “or
the Company’s 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan (or any successor plan)”
following the reference to the “Company’s 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan (or any
successor plan).”
 
9.          Section
4(h)(i) is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at the end
thereof:
 
“The
flight privileges subject to this Section 4(h)(i) are governed by the terms of
the applicable flight privilege rules of the Company not in conflict with this
Section 4(h)(i), may not be liquidated or exchanged for any other benefit, and
the amount of any such benefits provided in one taxable year of the Executive
shall not affect the amount payable in any subsequent taxable year of the
Executive.  Any amount paid as a cash reimbursement shall be paid not
later than the last day of the taxable year of the Executive following the
taxable year of the Executive in which the expense was incurred.”
 
10.          Section
4(h)(iii) is amended by the addition of the following sentence, at the end
thereof:
 
“Such
payment shall be made within 75 days of the date of employment separation,
subject to Section 4(j) to the extent applicable.”
 
11.          Section
4(i) of the Agreement is amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“Payments
under this Section 4(i) must be made within 75 days of the end of the calendar
year in which the Executive’s termination of employment occurred, subject to
Section 4(j) to the extent applicable; provided that this Section 4(i) shall not
be effective to the extent it would result in impermissible acceleration of any
amounts subject to section 409A of the Code.”
 
12.          Section
4(j) is hereby amended and restated in the entirety, to provide as
follows:
 
“(j)           Time of Payment of Certain
Benefits.
 
Payment
of amounts under Sections 4(a), 4(c), 4(h)(iii), and 4(i) shall be made in a
single lump sum within 75 days following the Executive’s separation from
employment, and in any event not later than 75 days after the end of the taxable
year of the Executive in which the separation from employment shall occur;
provided that if the Executive is a “specified employee”, as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or successor guidance thereto, as of the date of
termination from employment, any such payments to the extent subject to section
409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code, shall not be made until the first business day
following the date of the 6-month anniversary of the Executive’s separation from
employment.”
 
13.          The
third sentence of Section 5(b) of the Agreement is hereby amended by deletion of
the period at the end thereof and insertion of the following language, at the
end thereof:
 
“and in
any event not later than the end of the taxable year of the Executive following
the taxable year of the Executive in which payment of the relevant tax is
made.”
 
14.          Section
5(e) of the Agreement is hereby amended by deletion of the period at the end
thereof and insertion of the following language, at the end
thereof:
 
“and in
any event not later than the end of the taxable year of the Executive following
the taxable year of the Executive in which payment of the relevant tax is
made.”
 
15.          The
final three sentences of Section 5(h) of the Agreement are hereby deleted in
their entirety and are replaced by the following two sentences:
 
“In the
event that any payment or benefit intended to be provided under this Agreement
or otherwise is required to be reduced pursuant to this Section 5(h), the
severance payment under Section 4(a) shall be the payment subject to such
deduction.  If further reduction is required, stock based compensation
payments shall be subject to such reduction.”
 
16.          Section
7(b) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following
language, at the end thereof:
 
“In the
event the Executive’s employment is terminated, any payment by the Company or
any such trust shall be made pursuant to this Section 7(b) within 75 days
following the date of the Executive’s separation from employment.  No
such transfer to a trust shall be made to the extent it shall trigger the excise
tax under section 409A(b)(3) or (4) of the Code.”
 
17.          Section
8 of the Agreement is amended by the addition of a new Section 8(c), at the end
thereof:
 
“(c)           The
Executive and the Company shall cooperate to assure that payments made under
this Agreement do not trigger the excise tax penalties of section 409A of the
Code, and, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, if any
payment under this Agreement to a “specified employee”, as described in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-1(k) or successor guidance thereto shall constitute “deferred
compensation” as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(b) or successor
guidance thereto, as determined by counsel to the Company, such payment shall be
deferred until the first day after the 6 month anniversary of the date of the
Executive’s separation from employment, except for payments described in Section
4(b), 4(d), 4(e) and 4(h)(i).”
 
18.          Section
17 of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“The
provisions of this Agreement specifying payment dates that differ from
applicable dates in the Agreement prior to its amendment shall be deemed to
constitute a change in time of payment and/or method of payment as permitted
under Internal Revenue Service 2006-79 as revised by Internal Revenue Service
Notice 2007-86 and shall be interpreted consistently with such guidance,
including the requirement that it is not applicable to a payment due in the
current taxable year of such change.”
 
19.          Except
as amended hereby, the Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect.  This Amendment is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Amendment be executed and
delivered as of the day and year first above set forth.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           
 

 
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.
 
By:           
Its:           
 

Executive
 

 



EX-10.127
18
ex10127.htm
SUPPLEMENTAL EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM FOR OFFICERS, AMENDED

ex10127.htm







 
 
THE
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM (SERP) FOR OFFICERS
OF
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

AND
THE

SERP
SUMMARY PLAN DESCRIPTION

AS
AMENDED AND RESTATED


















 



 






 



THE
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM (SERP) FOR OFFICERS
OF
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

AND
THE

SERP
SUMMARY PLAN DESCRIPTION

AS
AMENDED AND RESTATED

TABLE OF
CONTENTS

Page

 




ARTICLE
      I


NAME
      AND PURPOSE OF THE PLAN 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




ARTICLE
      II


DEFINITIONS
      AND CONSTRUCTION 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      IIIELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      IV BENEFITS IN CONNECTION WITH THE BASE DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      V CONTRIBUTIONS AND EARNINGS CREDITS IN CONNECTION WITH THE $UPER $AVER
      PLUS PLAN[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      VIPAYMENT OF BENEFITS[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      VIIAMENDMENT AND TERMINATION[INSERT
      PAGE NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      VIIIGENERAL CONDITIONS[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      IXFUNDING[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XTRUST[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIERISA RIGHTS[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIICLAIMS PROCEDURES[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIIIFINALITY OF DECISIONS OR ACTS[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIV GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR PLAN[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]







 



 






 




ARTICLE
I
NAME
AND PURPOSE OF THE PLAN 

 
Section
1.1            Name and Purpose of the
Plan.
 
  This
Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
Inc. (the “Plan”) provides supplemental retirement benefits to selected officers
of American Airlines, Inc.  It is amended and restated to comply with
section 409A of the Code.  Prior to January 1, 2001, the supplemental
benefits provided under this Plan consisted only of supplemental retirement
benefits in excess of the maximum pension benefits payable under a Participant's
Base Defined Benefit Plan and a supplemental retirement benefit based on a
Participant's Incentive Compensation and Performance Returns.  These
continuing benefits are described in Article IV of the
Plan.  Effective January 1, 2001, certain Participants, who
participate in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, either because they elected to forego
participation in a Base Defined Benefit Plan, or because they were not eligible
to elect to participate in a Base Defined Benefit Plan, became eligible to
receive benefits under Article V of the Plan.
 

Effective
October 15, 2002, the Plan was amended and restated in the entirety to provide
for irrevocable funding of certain benefits through the Trust Agreement under
the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
Inc.  This irrevocable trust funds certain benefits under Article IV
of the Plan.  The Trust Agreement under Supplemental Executive
Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc. Participating in the
$uper $aver Plus Plan was established and funded on September 15,
2005.  This irrevocable trust funds certain benefits under Article V
of the Plan.  Since the most recent amendment of the Plan, section
409A of the Code has been enacted and requires further amendment of the
Plan.  Accordingly, the Plan is hereby amended and restated in the
entirety effective as of January 1, 2005, except as otherwise provided
herein.

ARTICLE
II
DEFINITIONS
AND CONSTRUCTION

 
Section
2.1            Definitions.  Throughout
this Plan, certain defined terms are used which are identified by initial
capitalization.  Such terms are defined in this Section 2.1, unless
the context in which such terms are used clearly provides
otherwise.
 
 
(a) Act.  The
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
 
 
(b) Active Funding
Participant.  A Participant who currently performs active
duties of employment while a Participant pursuant to Section 3.1 who is vested
in a Funded Accrued Benefit under this Plan.
 
 
(c) AMR.  AMR
Corporation, and any successor thereto.
 
 
(d) Annual Defined Benefit
Retirement Benefit.  The amount determined by subtracting the
Base Defined Benefit Plan Benefit from the greatest of (i) the Base Plan Social
Security Offset Benefit, (ii) the Final Average Earnings Benefit, or (iii) the
Basic Benefit.  If the Base Defined Benefit Plan of a Participant is
the American Airlines, Inc. Pilot Retirement Benefit Program, the Annual Defined
Benefit Retirement Benefit shall be the amount determined by subtracting the
Base Defined Benefit Plan Benefit from the amount that would have been payable
under the Base Defined Benefit Plan in the absence of the Base Defined Benefit
Plan limits on compensation and benefits under the Code, plus the Supplemental
Incentive Compensation Retirement Benefit and the Supplemental Performance
Return Retirement Benefit (and for such purposes variable benefits shall be
disregarded).  In determining the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement
Benefit under this Plan, any additional pension service or age credit which the
Company and/or the Plan is required to provide pursuant to a separate
contractual agreement or a employment representation shall be added to Credited
Service or age in the determination of the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement
Benefit under this Plan, but not added as service or age to be credited under
the applicable Base Defined Benefit Plan.
 
 
(e) Average Incentive
Compensation.  An amount calculated as follows:
 
 
(1) The sum
of a Participant's four highest annual Incentive Compensation awards (or the sum
of all such awards if the Participant has fewer than four such awards) paid to a
Participant during the time period beginning on or after January 1, 1985, and
ending on the first to occur of:
 
 
(A) the
Participant's actual retirement under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, or under
$uper $aver if the Participant is not participating in a Base Defined Benefit
Plan,
 
 
(B) the date
of the Participant's death, or
 
 




(C)  


the
      date of the Participant’s
retirement.




 
 
If a
Participant is credited with less than a full year of Credited Service as a
Participant in any year in which Incentive Compensation is paid, that portion of
the Participant's Incentive Compensation that is taken into account will be
prorated based on the Credited Service earned by the Participant for such
year.
 
 
(2) Divide
the sum determined in (1) above, by four (or by the number of such awards if the
Participant has fewer than four such awards).
 
 
(f) Average Performance
Return.  An amount calculated as follows:
 
 
(1) The sum
of a Participant's four highest annual Performance Return awards (or the sum of
all such awards if the Participant has fewer than four such awards) paid to the
Participant during the Participant's career, and ending on the first to occur
of:
 
 
(A) the
Participant's actual retirement under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, or under
$uper $aver if the Participant is not participating in a Base Defined Benefit
Plan,
 
 
(B) the date
of the Participant's death, or
 
 




(C)  


the
      date of the Participant’s
retirement.




 
 
(2) Divide
the sum determined in (1) above, by four (or by the number of such awards if the
Participant has fewer than four such awards).
 
 
(g) Base Defined Benefit
Plan.  The defined benefit retirement benefit plan (or plans)
of the Company which qualifies under section 401 of the Code and under which
certain Participants covered under this Plan are eligible to receive
benefits.
 
 
(h) Base Defined Benefit Plan
Benefit.  The annual benefit a Participant or Beneficiary is
entitled to receive from the Base Defined Benefit Plan upon retirement,
disability, death or termination of employment, subject to the Base Defined
Benefit Plan provisions which limit such benefit to the maximum amount permitted
by the Code.
 
 
(i) Base Plan Social Security
Offset Benefit.  The annual amount of a Participant's or
Beneficiary's benefit under any “Social Security Offset Benefit,” as defined in
the Base Defined Benefit Plan, computed without regard to the Base Defined
Benefit Plan limits on compensation and benefits under the Code, plus the
Supplemental Incentive Compensation and Performance Return Retirement
Benefit.
 
 
(j) Basic
Benefit.  The annual amount of a Participant's or Beneficiary's
benefit under any “Basic Benefit,” as defined in the Base Defined Benefit Plan,
computed without regard to the Base Defined Benefit Plan limits on compensation
and benefits under the Code, plus the Supplemental Incentive Compensation and
Performance Return Retirement Benefit.
 
 
(k) Beneficiary.  A
person designated by a Participant who, as permitted under the terms of the
Plan, is or may be entitled to a benefit under the Plan in the event of the
death of the Participant.  If no Beneficiary is designated, or if the
designated Beneficiary is not then living, benefits will be paid pursuant to
Section 6.4.
 
 
(l) Board of
Directors.  The Board of Directors of AMR.
 
 
(m) Change in
Control.  A "Change in Control" as defined in Section 11 of the
AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended.  The
determination of the occurrence of a Change in Control shall be made by the
Committee, consistent with the definition of such term as contained in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto and such provisions of
the AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended.
 
 
(n) Code.  The
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
 
(o) Committee.  The
administrative committee appointed by the Board of Directors to manage and
administer this Plan.
 
 
(p) Company.  Any
subsidiary of American Airlines, Inc. or any subsidiary of AMR, which is
designated for inclusion as a participating employer in the Plan, as determined
by the Board of Directors.  
 
 
(q) Credited
Service.   The term “Credited Service” under this Plan has
the same meaning for purposes of this Plan as it has in the applicable Base
Defined Benefit Plan, except as provided in Section 2.1(d) with respect to
additional age or service credit.  
 
 
(r) Disabled (or
Disability).  "Disability” shall have the meaning defined in
section 409A(2)(C) of the Code.  Determination of Disability shall be
made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or
successor guidance thereto.
 
 
(s) Final Average Earnings
Benefit.  The annual amount of a Participant's or Beneficiary's
benefit under any “Final Average Earnings Benefit,” as defined in the Base
Defined Benefit Plan, computed without regard to the Base Defined Benefit Plan
limits on compensation and benefits under the Code, plus the Supplemental
Incentive Compensation and Performance Return Retirement Benefit.
 
 
(t) Funded Accrued
Benefit.  The portion of the present value of the vested
benefit under Article IV or Article V represented by a credit to a bookkeeping
account of a Participant as a Funded Accrued Benefit in a Trust.
 
 
(u) Funding
Account.  A bookkeeping entry maintained under the name of each
Active Funding Participant to reflect the amount of Funded Accrued Benefit on
account of such Active Funding Participant.
 
 
(v) Incentive
Compensation.  Compensation paid to a Participant on or after
January 1, 1985, in accordance with one of the annual incentive compensation
plans adopted by the Board of Directors or the Board of Directors of American
Airlines, Inc.  For purposes of this definition, long-term, multi-year
incentive compensation plans shall not be considered to be incentive
compensation plans.
 
 
(w) Non-Active Funding
Participant.  A Participant who is not yet vested in a benefit
under this Plan, or who is on a Management Leave of Absence under the AMR
Management Leave Policy or who is retired or otherwise separated from
employment, for whom no Funding Account is maintained.
 
 
(x) Non-Funded Accrued
Benefit.  The portion of the benefit under Article IV and/or
Article V not represented by amounts credited to the Funding Account of a
Participant as a Funded Accrued Benefit.
 
 
(y) Participant.  An
elected officer of American Airlines, Inc., who is a participant in a Base
Defined Benefit Plan or the $uper $aver Plus Plan, shall be a
Participant.  An individual who is an appointed officer of American
Airlines, Inc. or a designated officer of another Company may be a Participant
only if (i) he or she is a participant in a Base Defined Benefit Plan or the
$uper $aver Plus Plan and (ii) is designated as a Participant by the Board of
Directors or under a writing signed by the Chairman of AMR.
 
 
(z) Performance
Return.  Compensation paid to a Participant pursuant to a
specified portion of career equity shares granted to the Participant, as
determined by the Board of Directors.  
 
 
(aa) Plan.  The
Supplemental Executive Retirement Program of American Airlines, Inc., as
amended.  The Plan may also be referred to herein as the
“SERP”.  This Plan features a supplement to defined benefit plan
benefits as described in Article IV and a supplement to $uper $aver Plus Plan
benefits, as described in Article V.
 
 
(bb) Specified
Employee.  A “key employee”, as defined in section 416(i) of
the Code on each December 31.  If the key employee is a key employee
on December 31 of a calendar year, the key employee shall be deemed to be a
Specified Employee for the twelve (12) month period beginning on the first day
of the fourth month following such December 31.
 
 
(cc) $uper
$aver.  $uper $aver, a 401(k) Capital Accumulation Plan for
Employees of Participating AMR Corporation Subsidiaries, which qualifies under
sections 401(a) and 401(k) of the Code, and under which certain Participants are
eligible to receive benefits.
 
 
(dd) $uper $aver Plus
Plan.  $uper $aver Plus, a Supplement to $uper $aver, which
describes a program of benefits provided by employer contributions, in addition
to those benefits available under the regular provisions of $uper
$aver.  
 
 
(ee) $uper $aver Plus Plan
Account.  A
bookkeeping entry maintained under the name of each Participant to record
the deemed contributions and earnings credited under the name of the Participant
pursuant to Article V.
 
 
(ff) $uper $aver Plus Plan Excess
Contribution.  A contribution credited to the Participant's
$uper $aver Plus Plan Account that is equal to the total employer contributions
(exclusive of cash or deferred contributions under sections 401(k) and 402(g) of
the Code) that would have been credited under the Participant’s accounts in the
$uper $aver Plus Plan, commencing in 2006, based upon the Participant's
elections under the $uper $aver Plus Plan in effect as of December 31 of the
year preceding the calendar year for which the $uper $aver Plus Plan Excess
Contribution is credited, but for the provisions of sections 401(a)(17),
415 and 402(g) of the Code (or any Code sections replacing such sections with
comparable limitations).  For 2005, this election must have been in
effect as of March 15, 2005.  Additionally, the credited $uper $aver
Plus Plan Excess Contribution shall include the amount that would have been
credited to the Participant's account under the $uper $aver Plus Plan based on
the Participant's contribution rate election in effect as of December 31 of the
calendar year preceding the calendar year for which the $uper $aver Plus Plan
Excess Contribution is credited under $uper $aver if Incentive Compensation had
constituted compensation subject to deferral under $uper $aver and the $uper
$aver Plus Plan; provided that for 2005, this election must have been in effect
as of March 15, 2005.
 
 
(gg) Supplemental Incentive
Compensation Retirement Benefit.  The amount determined by
multiplying the Average Incentive Compensation by two percent for each year of
Credited Service.
 
 
(hh) Supplemental Incentive
Compensation and Performance Return Retirement Benefit.  The
difference between the benefits calculated under any “Social Security Offset
Benefit” formula as defined in the Base Defined Benefit Plan, including and
excluding Average Incentive Compensation and Average Performance Return, in each
case computed without regard to the Base Defined Benefit Plan limits on
compensation and benefits under the Code.  
 
 
(ii) Supplemental Performance
Return Retirement Benefit.  The amount determined by
multiplying the Average Performance Return by two percent for each year of
Credited Service.
 
 
(jj) Trust (or
Trusts).  The Trust Agreement Under Supplemental Executive
Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc. entered into between
American Airlines, Inc. and Wachovia Bank National Association, which funds
certain vested benefits provided pursuant to Article IV, and/or the Trust
Agreement under Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of
American Airlines, Inc. Participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, which funds
certain vested benefits provided pursuant to Article V.
 
 
(kk) Trustee.  Wachovia
Bank, National Association, or any successor thereto.
 
 
Section
2.2 Construction.  With
respect to Active Funding Participants, this Plan is an “employee pension
benefit plan” (as defined in section 3(2) of the Act) that is an “individual
account plan” and a “defined contribution plan” (as defined in section 3(34) of
the Act), and as to all other Participants, the Plan is a plan described in
sections 201(2), 301(a)(3) and 401(a)(1) of the Act.  The Plan is
exempt from Part 3 of Subtitle B of Title I of the Act pursuant to
section 301(a)(8) of the Act.  Funded Accrued Benefits are
intended not to be subject to section 409A of the Code, nor to constitute
“deferred compensation” as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(b) or
successor guidance thereto.  With respect to Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits, this non-qualified plan shall be, and is intended to be, a plan that
is unfunded and maintained by the Company to provide deferred compensation to a
select group of management or highly-compensated employees, pursuant to sections
201(2), 301(a)(3), and 401(a)(1) of the Act.  Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits are intended to be subject to the requirements of section 409A of the
Code.  The Committee shall have the exclusive discretionary authority
to interpret and construe the terms of the Plan and the exclusive discretionary
authority to determine eligibility for, and the amount of, all benefits
hereunder.  Any such determinations or interpretations of the Plan
adopted by the Committee shall be final and conclusive and shall bind all
parties, subject to Article XII.  This Plan shall be construed
consistently with the foregoing.  This Plan shall be construed insofar
as practicable so as to be consistent with the requirements of section 409A of
the Code and applicable guidance issued thereunder, to preclude plan failures
under section 409A(a)(1)(A) of the Code.  All questions pertaining to
the construction, validity and effect of the Plan shall be determined in
accordance with the laws of the United States and the State of
Texas.  If any provision of this Plan shall be held by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining provisions of this Plan
shall continue to be fully effective.  Words in the singular shall
include the plural, and vice versa, where the context
permits.  Headings and subheadings in the text of this Plan are for
reference only and shall not be considered in the construction of this
Plan.  This document serves as the Plan document and also as the
Summary Plan Description, as required by the Act.
 

ARTICLE
III
ELIGIBILITY
AND PARTICIPATION

 
Section
3.1 Participation
Designation.  Elected officers of American Airlines, Inc. who
are participants in a Base Defined Benefit Plan or the $uper $aver Plus Plan are
Participants in the Plan.  An appointed officer of American Airlines,
Inc. or an officer of another Company may be a Participant only if he or she is
a participant in a Base Defined Benefit Plan or the $uper $aver Plus Plan and is
designated as a Participant by the Board of Directors or under a writing signed
by the Chairman of AMR.
 
 
Section
3.2            Accrual
Under Base Plan.  Any Participant in this
Plan who was a Participant prior to January 1, 2001, and who ceased to
continue to accrue service for benefits under the Base Defined Benefit Plan as
of such date pursuant to an election to participate in the $uper $aver Plus Plan
shall remain eligible for the benefits accrued under Article IV of the Plan for
service prior to such date.  No further accruals of service for
benefits under Article IV of the Plan shall occur, however, after the effective
date of the Participant's election to forego participation in the Base Defined
Benefit Plan.  Such Participants who forego participation in the Base
Defined Benefit Plan shall be eligible to receive benefits determined under
Article IV with respect to service for periods prior to January 1, 2001, and/or
under Article V of the Plan, for periods commencing on and after January 1,
2001.
 
 
Section
3.3            Base Defined Benefit Plan
Participants.  Participants who continue to accrue service for
benefits in the Base Defined Benefit Plan after January 1, 2001, or who commence
participation thereafter and who do not accrue benefits under Article V of the
Plan, shall continue to accrue benefits as provided herein only under Article IV
of the Plan.
 
 
Section
3.4 Change of Participant
Status.  A Participant who is elected or appointed as an
officer and later becomes a non-officer will have any SERP benefit pursuant to
Article V as an officer frozen (subject to adjustment pursuant to Section 5.2 in
the case of benefits under Article V) as of the last date the Participant serves
as an officer, but such $uper $aver Plus Plan Account shall remain payable under
this Plan.  A Participant who is elected or appointed as an officer
and later becomes a non-officer will have any SERP benefit pursuant to Article
IV as an officer frozen as of the last date the Participant serves as an
officer, but such benefit shall remain payable under this Plan.
 

ARTICLE
IV
BENEFITS
IN CONNECTION WITH THE BASE DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN

 
Section 4.1            Base Defined Benefit
Retirement Benefit.  The Plan will pay an Annual Defined
Benefit Retirement Benefit to a Participant who earned benefits under this Plan
while participating in the Base Defined Benefit Plan.  The portion of
any such Annual Defined Benefit Retirement Benefit that was funded by a credit
to the Funding Account for an Active Funding Participant shall be paid from, and
credited against, the Participant's Funding Account and paid through the
Trust.
 
 
Section
4.2 No Benefit
Payable.  Except as provided
in this Plan, if no benefit is payable under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, then
no benefit will be payable under Article IV of the Plan.
 

ARTICLE
V
CONTRIBUTIONS
AND EARNINGS CREDITS
IN
CONNECTION WITH THE $UPER $AVER PLUS PLAN

 
Section
5.1            $uper $aver Plus Plan
Benefit.  If a Participant in
this Plan is participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, the Committee shall
credit annually to the Participant’s $uper $aver Plus Plan Account a $uper $aver
Plus Plan Excess Contribution.  
 
 
Section
5.2            Additional
Credits.  In
addition to the $uper $aver Plus Plan Excess Contribution provided for under
this Article V pursuant to Section 5.1, the Committee shall periodically,
at such times during a calendar year as shall be determined in its sole
discretion, credit or debit, as the case may be, to a Participant’s $uper $aver
Plus Plan Account, the earnings or losses that would have accrued to such $uper
$aver Plus Plan Account if such $uper $aver Plus Plan Account were invested in
the investment funds elected by the Participant during the relevant computation
period, based on the investment elections available under the $uper $aver Plus
Plan.
 
 
Section
5.3 No Benefit
Payable.  Except as provided
in this Plan, if no benefit is payable under the $uper $aver Plus Plan, then no
benefit will be payable under Article V of the Plan.  In making such
determination, benefits attributable to contributions under $uper $aver, other
than under the $uper $aver Plus Plan, shall be disregarded, except as provided
in Section 6.3.  The amount of any Funded Accrued Benefit contribution
under this Article V shall be paid to the Trust, and credited to the
Participant's Funding Account.  Amounts paid to a Participant on
account of this Article V from amounts credited to a Funding Account shall be
paid from, and credited against, the Participant's $uper $aver Plus Plan Account
and paid through a Trust.
 

ARTICLE
VI
PAYMENT
OF BENEFITS

 
Section 6.1            General
Rule.  Benefits being paid under the Plan that commenced prior
to January 1, 2005, shall, if continuing to be paid on an annuity basis as of
October 3, 2004, continue to be paid in accordance with the terms of the Plan in
effect prior to January 1, 2005.  All benefits payable on and after
January 1, 2005, shall be distributed in the form of a single lump-sum
distribution.  This change in form of payment is made pursuant to
section 3.02 of Internal Revenue Service Notice 2006-79, Internal Revenue
Service Notice 2007-86, Q&A 19(c) of Internal Revenue Service Notice 2005-1,
and section XIB of the Preamble to the Treasury Regulations under section 409A
of the Code.  In determining the amount of the lump sum distribution,
the provisions of the Base Defined Benefit Plan and the $uper $aver Plus Plan
consistent with this Plan will apply, including, but not limited to, social
security offset provisions and early retirement reductions.  In
calculating the lump sum payment of amounts payable under Article IV, the
interest rate used shall be the applicable interest rate promulgated by the
Internal Revenue Service under section 417(e)(3) of the Code for the third month
preceding the date on which payment is to be made, provided that the application
of such rate shall, commencing January 1, 2008, be phased in using the same
methodology as employed under the Retirement Benefit Plan of American Airlines,
Inc. for Agent, Management, Specialist, Support Personnel and
Officers.  Prior to 2008, the mortality rate shall be the 1983 GAM
male table for male Participants, and the 1983 GAM female table for female
Participants.  After 2007, the mortality table shall be determined
under section 430(h)(3) of the Code.
 
 
Section
6.2 Time of
Payment.  Payment of benefits payable under Article IV shall
not be paid prior to the date on which the Participant is entitled to commence
early retirement benefits under the applicable Base Retirement Plan (as in
effect on January 1, 2005, and assuming that the Participant remained in the
employment of the Company until such date of early retirement
eligibility).  Subject to such limitations, the lump sum payment of
benefits under Article IV shall be payable to the Participant not later than
sixty (60) days after the earlier of the date on which the
Participant:
 
 
(a) becomes
Disabled, or
 
 
(b) terminates
from employment with AMR and the Company in a manner constituting a “separation
from service” as defined under Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.
 

Payment
of benefits under Article V, consisting of a lump sum payment of all amounts
credited to the $uper $aver Plus Plan Account, shall be made not later than
sixty (60) days after the earliest date on which the Participant:

(a)           becomes
Disabled, or

(b)           terminates
from employment with AMR and the Company in a manner constituting a “separation
from service” as defined under Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.

This
change in time of payment is made pursuant to section 3.02 of Internal Revenue
Service Notice 2006-79, Internal Revenue Service Notice 2007-86, Q&A 19(c)
of Internal Revenue Service Notice 2005-1, and Section XIB of the Preamble to
the Treasury Regulations under section 409A of the
Code.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no distribution of Non-Funded
Accrued Benefits under this Section 6.2 to a Participant who is a Specified
Employee shall be made until the earlier of (a) thirty (30) days after the
date of death of the Participant or (b) six (6) months after the date of
termination of employment of the Participant, unless the payment is made due to
Disability or pursuant to Section 6.4 (subject also the early retirement date
limitation provided above).  Neither the Company, the Committee nor
the Participant shall have any right or power to accelerate benefit distribution
under this Plan, subject to Sections 6.3, 7.1 and Section 10.1.
 
Section
6.3 Payment
Upon a Change in Control.  Upon a Change in Control
with respect to AMR or American Airlines, Inc., a Participant will receive a
lump sum, one-time payment equal to the present value as of the date of the
Change in Control of the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement Benefit to be paid
pursuant to Article IV, or the entire amount credited to the Participant’s $uper
$aver Plus Plan Account pursuant to Article V, as applicable.  The Change in Control
payment shall be computed by assuming that payments under the Base Defined
Benefit Plan would commence at the earliest possible retirement age for the
Participant, and assuming that the Participant separated from employment as of
the Change in Control.  With respect to benefits under Article V, the
Change in Control payment shall equal the entire $uper $aver Plus Plan Account
balance under Article V as of the payment date.  In the event a
Participant is not vested in benefits under the Base Defined Benefit Plan or
under the $uper $aver Plus Plan, the Participant shall nevertheless be deemed to
have satisfied the vesting requirements of the Base Defined Benefit Plan (and of
the $uper $aver Plus Plan) for purposes of computing the amount of the Change in
Control payment.  The benefit under this Section 6.3 shall be paid in
the calendar year of the Change in Control or within sixty (60) days
thereafter.
 
 
Section
6.4 Death
Benefits.  In the event of the death of a Participant for whom
a benefit under this Plan is accrued under Article IV and after the Participant
is entitled to early retirement benefits under a Base Defined Benefit Plan, if a
surviving spouse benefit is payable under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, the
Participant’s surviving spouse will be entitled to a lump sum equivalent of the
spousal benefit that is calculated through the same methodology as used in
determination of the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement Benefit, substituting the
spousal benefit for the Base Defined Benefit Plan Benefit.  In the
event of the death of a Participant entitled to a benefit under Article V, the
Participant’s Beneficiary shall be entitled to receive a lump sum payment of the
benefit to which the Participant would have been entitled had the Participant
terminated from employment as of the date of death.  A Participant who
is accruing or has accrued benefits under Article V may designate a Beneficiary
or Beneficiaries to receive benefits payable in the event of the Participant’s
death, if any.  Any such designation shall be made in the manner
required by the Committee or its delegate, including a requirement for spousal
consent, if applicable.  If, for any reason, there is no surviving
designated Beneficiary for such benefits, benefits will be paid to the
Participant’s spouse, if then living; if the Participant’s spouse is not then
living, benefits will be paid in equal shares to each then living child of the
Participant; if no such child is then living, the benefits will be payable to
the estate of the Participant.  Such amounts will be paid in a lump
sum within sixty (60) days following the date of the Participant’s
death.
 
 
Section
6.5 Deductions for
Benefits.  In the event the
Participant has any outstanding debt with the Company, such as for payment of
taxes, the Company or the Committee may withhold or deduct from any payments to
be made to the Participant or Beneficiary under this Plan an amount(s) equal to
such outstanding debt.
 
 
Section
6.6 Payment of Funded
Benefits.  Amounts payable to an Active Funding Participant
will first be paid from the Trust through amounts credited to such Participant's
Funding Account under a Trust.  Any remaining amounts payable, and all
amounts payable to Non-Active Funding Participants, shall be paid as they become
payable from the Company's general assets or through a trust established
pursuant to Section 10.2.
 

ARTICLE
VII
AMENDMENT
AND TERMINATION

 
Section
7.1            Amendment and
Termination.  The Board of
Directors, or such person or persons, including the Committee, as may be
authorized in writing by the Board of Directors, may amend or terminate the Plan
at any time.  Any termination of the Plan which permits acceleration
of payment shall be made only in accordance with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or successor guidance thereto.
 
 
Section
7.2            Limitation on Amendment or
Termination.  No amendment or
termination pursuant to Section 7.1 shall adversely affect a benefit payable
under this Plan with respect to a Participant's employment by the Company prior
to the date of such amendment or termination unless such benefit is or becomes
payable under a successor plan or practice adopted by the Board of Directors or
its designee.
 
 
Section
7.3            Effect of Change in
Control.  Notwithstanding Sections 7.1 and 7.2 of the Plan, no
changes or amendments (including pertaining to termination) of the Plan will be
permitted after a Change in Control.
 

ARTICLE
VIII
GENERAL
CONDITIONS

 
Section
8.1            No Assignment.  The right to
receive benefits under the Plan may not be anticipated, alienated, sold,
transferred, assigned, pledged, encumbered or subjected to any charge or legal
process, and if any attempt is made to do so or a person eligible for any
benefit becomes bankrupt, the interest under the Plan of the person affected may
be terminated by the Committee and the Committee may in its sole discretion
cause the same to be held or applied for the benefit of one or more of the
dependents of such person, subject to Section 8.2 of the Plan or in the event of
the Participant’s death, if a death benefit is then payable under the
Plan.
 
 
Section
8.2            Exception for Domestic
Relations Orders.  Notwithstanding the
provisions in Section 8.1, upon receipt by the Plan of a “domestic relations
order” (as defined in section 206(d)(3)(B)(ii) of the Act) purporting to be a
“qualified domestic relations order” (as defined in section 206(d)(3)(B)(i) of
the Act), the Committee shall review such order using the domestic relations
order review procedures in effect under the Base Defined Benefit Plan or $uper
$aver, as applicable to benefits under Article IV or Article V,
respectively.  Upon the determination that a domestic relations order
meets the Plan's requirements to be a qualified domestic relations order, the
“alternate payee” (as defined in section 206(d)(3)(K) of the Act) shall be
eligible to receive benefits payable under the terms of the qualified domestic
relations order.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, an alternate
payee under a domestic relations order shall only be eligible to receive
benefits from the Plan when the Participant commences receipt of benefits under
Section 6.2.
 
 
Section 8.3            Force Majeure
Events.  In the event of any act of God, war, natural disaster,
aircraft grounding, revocation of operating certificate, terrorism, strike,
lockout, labor dispute, work stoppage, fire, epidemic or quarantine restriction,
act of government, critical materials shortage or any other act, whether similar
or dissimilar, beyond the control of the Company (each, a “Force Majeure
Event”), which Force Majeure Event affects the Company or its subsidiaries or
its affiliates, the Board of Directors, at its sole discretion, may suspend,
delay, defer or substitute (for such period of time as the Board of Directors
may deem necessary) any payments due currently or in the future under the Plan,
including, but not limited to, any payments that have accrued to the benefit of
a Participant but have not yet been paid, but only to the extent permitted under
Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(d), or successor guidance thereto.
 
 
Section
8.4 Plan
Administration.  American
Airlines, Inc., is the sponsor of the Plan and the Committee or its delegate
shall be the plan administrator, and shall have authority to manage the
operation and administration of the Plan.  The Committee may designate
one or more individuals to carry out any of its administrative responsibilities
in connection with the Plan.  The Company may employ one or more
persons to render advice to any director, officer or employee of the Company
with respect to such individual's responsibilities under the
Plan.  The Committee may act by majority vote of its members at a
meeting or by a signed writing.  The Committee may engage agents to
assist it and may engage legal counsel who may be legal counsel for the
Company.  All reasonable expenses incurred by the Committee shall be
paid by the Company.  In administering the Plan, the Committee may
conclusively rely upon the Company's payroll and personnel records and employee
benefit plan records maintained in the ordinary course of
business.  The Company may remove any member of a Committee at any
time, and a member may resign by written notice to the Company.  The
Committee may appoint successors to vacant positions, or such position may be
filled by the Company.
 

ARTICLE
IX
FUNDING

 
Section
9.1            Funding.  The Company will
pay the entire cost of the Plan, through the Trusts directly or under Section
10.2, or by direct payment, as applicable.  Any funding of a Trust for
a vested benefit accruing for a calendar year after December 31, 2004, as a
Funded Accrued Benefit, shall be made only within the calendar year of accrual
or by March 15 thereafter and shall not exceed the amount of such vested
accrual.  In the event of such funding, the amount accrued and so
funded shall be a Funded Accrued Benefit and shall not constitute deferred
compensation subject to section 409A of the Code.  Any accrued benefit
not funded through a Funding Account shall be a Non-Funded Account Benefit under
this Plan.  No contribution shall be made to a Trust during a
“restricted period” as defined in section 409A(b)(3)(B) of the Code, to the
extent such contribution would cause amounts to be taxable under section 409A of
the Code.
 

ARTICLE
X
TRUST

 
Section 10.1 Trust
Documents.  The Company established an irrevocable trust
effective October  14, 2002, pursuant to the Trust Agreement Under
Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
Inc., to fund the anticipated after-tax distributions of Funded Accrued Benefits
under Article IV of the Plan, as determined by the Committee, as of
October 14, 2002, and as determined from time to time thereafter, and an
irrevocable trust effective September 15, 2005, pursuant to the Trust Agreement
under Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American
Airlines, Inc. Participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, to fund the
anticipated after-tax distributions of Funded Benefits under Article V of the
Plan, as determined by the Committee.  Wachovia Bank, National
Association serves as the Trustee of the Trusts and holds the Trust assets for
the purpose of accumulating funds to pay Funded Accrued Benefits under the Plan
as they become due and payable.  The Trusts are so-called “secular
trusts” for Federal income tax purposes.  The assets of each Trust are
not subject to the claims of creditors of the Company or any of its corporate
affiliates.  Moreover, the contributions to the Trusts and the Trusts’
earnings will generally be taxable income to the Participants, although
subsequent distributions from the already taxed amounts will be made to
Participants free of Federal income tax.
 
 
Section
10.2 Trust for Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits.  To assist in the payment of Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits following a Change in Control, the Board of Directors or the Company's
General Counsel or the Company's Corporate Secretary may establish a trust, or
utilize a separate trust heretofore established, to fund Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits under the Plan.
 
 
Section
10.3 Requirements for the
Separate Trust for Non-Funded Accrued Benefits.  The trust
which may be established or otherwise utilized pursuant to Section 10.2 will be
maintained:
 
(a)           with
a nationally recognized banking institution with experience in serving as a
trustee for such matters,

(b)           with
the entirety of its assets held in the United States,

(c)           pursuant
to such documentation as recommended by outside counsel to the Company,
and

(d)           funded
so as to enable the trust to pay some or all of the Non-Funded Accrued Benefits
contemplated under the Plan, as may be determined by the Company's independent
compensation consultant, selected by the Company, in its sole and absolute
discretion.  Such trust shall be established in a manner not resulting
in taxable income pursuant to section 409A(b) of the Code.

Section
10.4                                Additional
Actions.  In addition, the Board of Directors, the Company's
General Counsel or the Company's Corporate Secretary may take any additional
actions deemed reasonably necessary to accomplish the stated purpose of Section
10.2.

ARTICLE
XI
ERISA
RIGHTS

 
Section
11.1 Statement of ERISA Rights in
Summary Plan Description.  As a Participant in any Funded
Accrued Benefits under the Plan, you are entitled to certain rights and
protections under ERISA.  ERISA provides that all Plan participants
shall be entitled to:
 




·  


Examine,
      without charge, at the plan administrator’s office, all Plan documents,
      including copies of all documents filed with the U.S. Department of Labor,
      such as Summary Annual Reports (SARs) and a copy of the latest Form 5500
      annual report filed by the Plan with the U.S. Department of Labor and
      available at the Public Disclosure Room of the Employee Benefits Security
      Administration.








·  


Obtain
      copies of all Plan documents and other Plan information including copies
      of the latest Form 5500 annual report and this Plan upon written request
      to the plan administrator. The plan administrator may charge a reasonable
      amount for the copies.








·  


Receive
      a summary of the Plan’s annual financial report (SAR). The plan
      administrator is required by law to furnish each participant with a
      SAR.








·  


Obtain
      a statement telling you whether you have a right to receive a pension at
      normal retirement age under the Plan and, if so, what the benefit amount
      would be at normal retirement age if you were to stop working now. This
      statement must be requested in writing and is not required to be given
      more often than once a year. This statement must be provided free of
      charge.





In
addition to creating rights for Plan participants, ERISA imposes duties upon the
people responsible for the Plan’s operation. The people who supervise the Plan’s
operation, called “Fiduciaries,” have a duty to do their jobs prudently and
solely in the interest of you and other Plan participants and
beneficiaries.  Fiduciaries who violate ERISA may be removed and
required to make good any losses they have caused the Plan.  No one,
including your employer or any other person may fine you or otherwise
discriminate against you in any way to prevent you from obtaining a pension
benefit or exercising your rights under ERISA.

The plan
administrator has the sole discretionary authority to interpret the terms of the
Plan and to determine eligibility for and entitlement to Plan benefits in
accordance with the terms of the Plan. Any interpretation or determination made
pursuant to such discretionary authority shall be given full force and effect
under the Plan.

If a
claim for a benefit is denied or ignored in whole or in part, you must receive a
written explanation of the reason for the denial. You have the right to have the
plan administrator review and reconsider the claim.  No one, including
an employer or any other person, may fire you or discriminate against you in any
way to prevent you from obtaining a benefit from the Plan or exercising your
rights under ERISA.

Under
ERISA, there are steps you can take to enforce the above rights. For instance,
if you request materials from the plan administrator and do not receive them
within thirty (30) days, you may sue in federal court. The court may require the
plan administrator to provide the materials and pay you up to $110 a day until
you receive the materials, unless the materials were not sent because of reasons
beyond the plan administrator’s control. If you have a claim for benefits that
is denied or ignored, in whole or in part, you may file suit in a state or
federal court.  In addition, if you disagree with the Plan’s decision
or lack thereof concerning the qualified status of a domestic relations order,
you may file suit in federal court.

If the
Plan’s Fiduciaries misuse the Plan’s money, or if you are discriminated against
for asserting your rights, you may seek assistance from the U.S. Department of
Labor, or you may file suit in a federal court. The court will decide who should
pay court costs and legal fees. If you are successful, the court may order the
person you have sued to pay those costs and fees. If you lose (i.e., if the
court finds your claim frivolous), the court may order you to pay these costs
and fees.

If you
have any questions about the Plan, contact the plan administrator.  If
there are any questions about this section or about your rights under ERISA, you
should contact the nearest office of the Employee Benefits Security
Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor listed in your telephone
directory or the Division of Technical Assistance and Inquiries, Employee
Benefits Security Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution
Avenue, N.W. Washington, D.C 20210. You may also obtain certain publications
about your rights and responsibilities under ERISA by calling the publications
hotline of the Employee Benefits Security Administration.

ARTICLE
XII
CLAIMS
PROCEDURES
 
Section
12.1 Claims.  A
claim for retirement benefits under the Plan must be submitted to the plan
administrator at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan
administrator.
 

If the
plan administrator determines that you are not entitled to receive all or part
of the benefits you claim, a notice will be provided to you within a reasonable
period of time, but no later than 90 days from the day your claim was received
by the plan administrator.  This notice (which will be provided to you
in writing by mail or hand delivery or through email) will
describe:
 




·  


The
      plan administrator’s determination,




 




·  


The
      basis for the determination (along with appropriate references to
      pertinent Plan provisions on which the denial is
  based),




 




·  


A
      description of any additional material or information necessary to perfect
      the claim and an explanation of why such material is necessary,
      and




 




·  


The
      procedure you must follow to obtain a review of the determination,
      including a description of the appeals procedure and your right to bring a
      cause of action for benefits under section 502(a) of ERISA. This notice
      will also, if appropriate, explain how you may properly complete your
      claim and why the submission of additional information may be
      necessary.




 
In
certain instances, the plan administrator may not be able to make a
determination within ninety (90) days from the day your claim for benefits was
submitted. In such situations, the plan administrator, in its sole and absolute
discretion, may extend the ninety (90) day period for up to one hundred eighty
(180) days, as long as the plan administrator provides you with a written notice
within the initial ninety (90) day period that explains:
 




·  


The
      reason for the extension, and




 




·  


 The date on which a
      decision is expected.




 
 
Section
12.2 Claim
Appeals.  If your claim for benefits is denied, either in whole
or in part, you may appeal the plan administrator’s denial by requesting a
review of your claim by the Committee (or its delegate).  Your written
request for an appeal must be received by the plan administrator within sixty
(60) days of the date you received your notice that the plan administrator
denied your claim.
 
As part
of your appeal, you may submit written comments, documents, records and other
information relating to your claim for benefits. You may also request reasonable
access to, and copies of, all documents, records, and other information relevant
to your claim. You will not be charged for this information. The Committee’s (or
its delegate’s) review of the plan administrator’s adverse determination will
take into account all comments, documents, records and other information you
submitted, without regard to whether such information was submitted and
considered in the plan administrator’s initial determination of your
claim.

If, after
reviewing your appeal and any further information that you have submitted, the
Committee (or its delegate) denies your claim, either in whole or in part, a
notice (which will be provided to you in writing by mail or hand delivery, or
through email) will be provided to you within a reasonable period of time, but
not later than sixty (60) days from the day your request for a review was
received by the plan administrator. In the event that an extension of time for
processing is required, you will be provided a written notice of the extension
not later than sixty (60) days from the day your request for a review was
received by the plan administrator.  In such situations, the Committee
(or its delegate), in its sole and absolute discretion, may extend the sixty
(60) day period for up to one hundred twenty (120) days, as long as the
Committee (or its delegate) provides you with a written notice within the
initial sixty (60) day period that explains:
 




·  


The
      reason for the extension, and




 




·  


The
      date on which a decision is
expected.




 




·  


The
      notice describing the Committee’s (or its delegate’s) decision will
      describe:




 




·  


The
      specific reason or reasons for its decision, including any adverse
      determinations;




 




·  


References
      to the specific Plan, Base Defined Benefit Plan or $uper $aver Plus Plan
      provisions on which the Committee (or its delegate)  based its
      determination;




 




·  


 Your right to
      receive, upon request and free of charge, reasonable access to, and copies
      of, all documents, records and other information relevant to your
      claim;




 




·  


 A description of any
      voluntary appeals procedures, if any, and your right to obtain information
      about such procedures, and




 




·  


Your
      right to bring a cause of action for benefits under section 502(a) of
      ERISA.





ARTICLE
XIII
FINALITY
OF DECISIONS OR ACTS
 
Section
13.1 Determination is
Final.  The Committee has the express authority to elect the
actuarial assumptions to be used in funding any benefits payable under the Plan
and, except as specified hereunder in Section 7.3 and in Article XII, to
interpret any provision of this Plan and to determine, at its sole discretion,
the meaning and application of any such provision as to each Participant or
Beneficiary under the Plan in accordance with the facts and circumstances of
each particular claim.  Except for the right of a Participant or
Beneficiary to appeal the denial of a claim, any decision or action of the
Committee, within its scope of authority, shall be final and binding on all
persons claiming a right to benefits under the Plan.  No benefit shall
be payable that the Committee does not deem is payable under the terms of the
Plan.
 


 



 






 




ARTICLE
XIV
GENERAL
INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR PLAN





Plan
      Name:


The
      Supplemental Executive Retirement Program (SERP) for Officers of American
      Airlines, Inc.





Plan
Sponsor:                                                      American
Airlines, Inc.
P O Box 619616
MD 5146
DFW International Airport, Texas
75261-9616

Employer
ID
No.:                                                      13-1502798

Plan
Number:                                                      888

Type of
Plan:                                                      As
described in Section 2.2

Plan
Administrator:                                                      Administrative
Committee
American Airlines, Inc.
4333 Amon Carter Blvd.
Fort Worth,
TX   76155
Attn:  Corporate
Secretary
Telephone:  817-963-1234

Legal
Agent:                                                      CT
Corporation

Trustee:                                           Wachovia
Bank National Association

Trustee(s)
Address:                                                      Wachovia
Bank National Association
Attn:  Executive
Services
One West Fourth Street
Winston-Salem,
NC  27150

Funding
Arrangement:                                                      Company
Liability for Non Funded Accrued Benefits
Trusts for Funded Accrued
Benefits

Plan
Year:                                                      January
1 to December 31


 



 






 



AS
AMENDED AND RESTATED EFFECTIVE AS OF JANUARY 1, 2005.


American
Airlines, Inc.


By:           


Its:           



EX-10.128
19
ex10128.htm
TRUST AGREEMENT UNDER SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM FOR OFFICERS PARTICIPATING IN DB PLAN

ex10128.htm
























TRUST
AGREEMENT
UNDER
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.



Amended
and Restated effective June 1, 2007



 



 






 



Table
of Contents

 
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      1.1.Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.2.Actuary

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.3.Beneficiary

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.4.Code

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.5.Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.6.Compensation Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.7.Corporation

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.8.Expense Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.9.Fund

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.10.Investment Manager

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.11.Participant

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.12.Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.13.Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.14.Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.15.Valuation Date

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
II CREATION, PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      2.1.Purpose of the Trust; Separate Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      2.2.Administration of the Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      2.3.Irrevocable; Not Subject to Creditor Claims

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      2.4.Secured Interest; Separate Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
III ACCOUNTS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      3.1.Fund and Accounts.

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      3.2.Written Certifications Provided by Corporation to the Trustee[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.3.Benefits Payable

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.4.Account Adjustment

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.5.Maintenance of Accounts

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.6.Taxability of the Trust and the Participants.

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.7.Accumulation/Distribution of Trust Income

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.8.Contributions by the Corporation for Income Taxes

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IV CONTRIBUTIONS, CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      4.1.Contributions to the Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      4.2.Provision of Benefits is Binding Obligation of Corporation[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      4.3.Provision of Reports and Written Certifications by the Corporation to
      the Trustee[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]








Section
      4.4.Distributions to Participants

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE V
ACTUARY [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
      5.1.Determination of Corporation’s Fund Contributions by Actuary[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      5.2.Resignation/Removal of Actuary

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VI INVESTMENTS AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE[INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      6.1.Fund Held in Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.2.Types of Investments

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.3.Powers and Authority of Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.4.Investment of Fund by Investment Manager

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.5.Making Benefit Payments

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.6.Deposit of Contributions by Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.7.Dealings with the Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.8.Use of Fund Assets to Pay Trust Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VII DUTIES OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      7.1.General Duties of the Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.2.Valuation of Fund

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.3.Reports and Records

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.4.No Duty to Advance Funds or to Administer the Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.5.Resignation/Removal of Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VIII COMPENSATION, IMMUNITIES AND INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      8.1.Trustee Compensation and Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      8.2.Expense Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      8.3.Immunities

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      8.4.Indemnity of the Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      8.5.Determination of Interests in the Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal
      Proceedings[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IX AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      9.1.Amendment of Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      9.2.Termination of Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE X
THE COMMITTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      10.1.Membership and Actions of the Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      10.2.Committee Compensation and Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      10.3.Indemnity of Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
XI MISCELLANEOUS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      11.1.Governing Law

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.2.No Effect on Employment

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.3.Successors

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.4.Severability

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.5.Incorporation of Plan as Part of Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.6.Execution in Counterparts

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.7.Effect of Divisions and Captions

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.8.Gender and Number

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.9.Mistake of Fact

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 



 






 



TRUST
AGREEMENT
 
UNDER
 
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
 
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.
 
THIS
AGREEMENT (the or this “Agreement”) was adopted effective as of the 14th day of
October, 2002, by and between AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC. (the “Corporation”), a
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, and
WACHOVIA BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION (the “Trustee”), a national association
organized and existing under the laws of the United States, and the individuals
constituting the Committee described in Section 10.1 (the
“Committee”).  By this instrument the Corporation hereby amends and
restates the Agreement in the entirety, effective as of June 1, 2007 (the
“Effective Date”).
 
RECITALS
 
WHEREAS, in January 1985, the
Board of Directors of AMR Corporation established the Supplemental Executive
Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc., as subsequently
amended (the “Plan”), for the purpose of paying retirement benefits to certain
officers of American Airlines, Inc. (the “Participants”) in excess of the amount
payable under the Corporation’s defined benefit plan; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation has
established an irrevocable trust to fund certain retirement benefits of the
Participants of the Plan; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires the Trustee to continue to undertake the responsibility for the
protection and conservation of the assets of the Trust, under the terms of the
Agreement; the Trustee is willing to continue such responsibility and the
Corporation has delivered assets to the Trustee to hold in trust for the purpose
of accumulating funds to pay benefits under the Plan as they become due and
payable; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires that the Committee under the Plan be responsible for the administration
of the Trust, and the Committee has undertaken the responsibility and duties of
the Committee pursuant to the terms of the Agreement; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
intends the Trust to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax purposes,
whereby the Participants will be subject to current taxation on the funds held
in the Trust; and
 
WHEREAS, the trust established
by this Agreement is not intended to be a “grantor trust” pursuant to sections
671 through 679 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”),
but is intended to be a taxable trust pursuant to sections 641 et seq. of the Code;
and
 
WHEREAS, subsequently to the
Effective Date, Revenue Ruling 2007-48 has been issued by the U.S. Treasury
Department, and the Corporation desires to update the Agreement so that the
Trust continues to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax purposes;

 
NOW, THEREFORE, in
consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the Corporation, the
Trustee and the Committee hereby amend and restate the Agreement in the
entirety, to provide as follows:
 
ARTICLE
I
 
DEFINITIONS
 
Each word
or phrase used herein which is in quotations shall have the meaning set forth in
this Article I, unless a different meaning is clearly required by
context.
 
Section
1.1.                                 Account.  “Account”
means the separate account established and maintained under the Fund with
respect to each Participant to provide a source of funds for the benefits
payable by the Corporation to, or with respect to, each such Participant under
the Plan.
 
Section
1.2.                                 Actuary.  “Actuary”
means the then acting actuary or firm of actuaries employed by the Corporation
to advise the Corporation with respect to contributions to be made under the
Plan.  The initial Actuary shall be Towers, Perrin, Forster &
Crosby, Inc. and Subsidiaries.
 
Section
1.3.                                 Beneficiary.  “Beneficiary”
holds the identical definition of the term as defined in the Plan.
 
Section
1.4.                                 Code.  “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
Section
1.5.                                 Committee.  “Committee”
means the committee of persons to whom the Corporation has delegated the
responsibility of the Trust’s administration.
 
Section
1.6.                                 Compensation
Committee.  “Compensation Committee” means the compensation Committee
of the Board of Directors of AMR Corporation.
 
Section
1.7.                                 Corporation.  “Corporation”
means American Airlines, Inc. and any successor thereto, or to the business
thereof, by whatever form or manner resulting.
 
Section
1.8.                                 Expense
Account.  A separate account of the Fund whereby the
Corporation may make contributions to be utilized by the Trustee to pay the
compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other
expenses of the Trust.
 
Section
1.9.                                 Fund.  “Fund”
means the money and property held by the Trustee under this
Agreement.
 
Section
1.10.                                 Investment
Manager.  “Investment Manager” means the then acting manager of
all or any of the assets of the Fund that is appointed by the Committee to
exercise investment responsibility with respect to all or such portion of the
Fund as determined by the Committee.
 
Section
1.11.                                 Participant.  “Participant”
means an “Active Funding Participant” in the Plan as defined at Section 2.1(b)
of the Plan.  
 
Section
1.12.                                 Plan.  “Plan”
means the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American
Airlines, Inc. originally effective January 1, 1985, and as amended from time to
time, including certain retirement benefits heretofore authorized and which may
hereafter be authorized to be payable to certain employees of the
Corporation.
 
Section
1.13.                                 Trust.  “Trust”
means the trust provided for under this Agreement.
 
Section
1.14.                                 Trustee.  “Trustee”
means the then acting trustee of the Trust.  The initial trustee of
the Trust is Wachovia Bank, National Association.
 
Section
1.15.                                 Valuation
Date.  “Valuation Date” means (i) the last business day of each
calendar quarter; (ii) in the case of a Participant who retires or whose
employment with the Corporation is terminated for any reason, the last business
day of the calendar month coincident with or immediately preceding the date of
such retirement or termination; and (iii) each other date or dates specified by
the Committee to the Trustee for the valuation of the Fund and adjustment of
Accounts.
 
ARTICLE
II
 
CREATION,
PURPOSE AND
 
ADMINISTRATION
OF THE TRUST
 
Section
2.1.                                 Purpose of the Trust;
Separate Trust.  This Trust is established by the Corporation,
the Trustee and the Committee for the purpose of accumulating funds to pay
benefits under the Plan.  Payments from the Fund to Participants or
their Beneficiaries shall be in discharge of the Corporation’s liability under
the terms of the Plan to such Participants to the extent such benefits are paid
from the Fund.  The Corporation intends that each Account established
pursuant to Article III be treated as a separate trust designed to satisfy, in
whole or in part, the Corporation’s liability under the Plan to the Participant
with respect to whom such Account is maintained.
 
Section
2.2.                                 Administration of the
Trust.  The Committee shall be solely responsible for the
administration of the Trust.  The Committee shall, upon request of the
Trustee, furnish the Trustee with such reasonable information as is necessary or
appropriate for the Trustee to carry out its responsibilities under this
Agreement, and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the
information received from the Committee.  The Corporation shall be
responsible for the administration of the Plan.  The Corporation
shall, upon request of either the Committee or the Trustee, furnish each of the
Committee and the Trustee with such reasonable information as each of the
Committee or the Trustee shall deem necessary or appropriate to carry out the
intent and purposes of the Trust, and each of the Committee and the Trustee
shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the information received from the
Corporation, unless, in the case of the Trustee, the Committee has informed the
Trustee in writing not to rely on such information.  
 
Section
2.3.                                 Irrevocable; Not Subject to
Creditor Claims.  Subject to the provisions of Section 9.2
hereof, this Trust shall be irrevocable.  In addition, the Fund shall
not be subject to the claims of the creditors of the Corporation in a bankruptcy
or other insolvency proceeding under Federal or state law, but shall be
maintained for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to Participants under
the Plan.  The right to receive benefits under the Plan through this
Agreement may not be anticipated, alienated, sold, transferred, assigned,
pledged, encumbered or subjected to any charge or legal process, and the
non-alienation provisions of Sections 8.1 and 8.2 of the Plan are hereby
incorporated in the entirety by this reference.  
 
Section
2.4.                                 Secured Interest; Separate
Account.  Each Participant shall have a secured interest in the
Account maintained in the Fund with respect to the benefits payable under the
Plan.  Each Participant’s Account will be maintained as a “separate
account” within the meaning of section 404(a)(5) of the Code.  The
Corporation agrees that during the existence of the Trust, the Corporation shall
not permit or cause, or amend this Agreement to permit or cause, the Fund, or
any part thereof, to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the payment
of benefits under the Plan to Participants and their Beneficiaries.
 
ARTICLE
III
 
ACCOUNTS
 
Section
3.1.                                 Fund and
Accounts.
 
(a) The Fund
under this Trust shall consist of such sums of money or other property (and the
earnings thereon) as shall from time to time be paid or delivered to the Trustee
and held by it pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
 
(b) Contributions
to the Trust with respect to the benefits of Participants shall be credited to
Accounts as provided in Section 3.4.  At the time the Corporation
makes an initial contribution to the Trust with respect to the benefits of a
Participant, it shall notify the Trustee of such fact and an Account shall be
established by the Trustee under the Fund.  The Corporation shall
provide the Trustee with such information or reports as are necessary to credit
contributions to the Account maintained with respect to each Participant in
accordance with Section 4.3 hereof.
 
Section
3.2.                                 Written Certifications
Provided by Corporation to the Trustee.  Subject to this
Section 3.2, the Trustee shall have responsibility for the maintenance of
Account records, including, without limitation, the responsibility for making
determinations regarding the adjustment of such Accounts under Section
3.4.  The Corporation shall provide the Trustee from time to time, but
not less frequently than annually, with written certifications pursuant to
Section 4.3 hereof concerning the amount and form of benefits payable to
each Participant under the Plan and the time or times when such benefits shall
become payable.  Each such certification shall state that it is made
in accordance with the terms of the Plan, is binding on the Trustee, and may not
be modified, amended or rescinded in any manner whatsoever, except by a
subsequent certification which complies with the requirements of Section
4.3.  The Trustee shall not be bound by, and shall ignore, any such
certification which does not comply with the requirements of Section
4.3.  The Trustee shall make payments to Participants and
Beneficiaries strictly in accordance with the terms of Section 4.4 hereof and
shall have no responsibility or duty to evaluate such certifications or other
reports with respect to their validity, accuracy or completeness or to make any
inquiry regarding the data or information contained therein.  If the
Corporation does not provide the Trustee with the information necessary to
establish an Account pursuant to this Section 3.2 and Section 4.3 herein, the
Trustee shall deposit any contributions for which it has not received
information into the Trustee’s Expense Account, and shall maintain the
contributions in its Expense Account until it has received such
information.
 
Section
3.3.                                 Benefits
Payable.  Any benefits becoming payable under the Plan to a
Participant or Beneficiary shall be paid from the Fund and charged against the
Account maintained with respect to the benefits of such
Participant.  No payment shall be made from the Fund to or with
respect to a Participant to the extent that such payment would exceed the
balance then remaining credited in the Account maintained with respect to such
Participant.
 
Section
3.4.                                 Account
Adjustment.  As of each Valuation Date, and based upon the
results of its valuation of the Fund as of such Valuation Date, the Committee
shall direct the Trustee to adjust Accounts to reflect realized and unrealized
gains, income and losses and chargeable expenses of the Fund on an accrual basis
since the preceding Valuation Date, in accordance with the provisions of this
Section 3.4.  The Account will be adjusted to reflect payment of
taxes paid by the Trust with respect to such contributions.  The
amount creditable to the Account of a Participant as of a Valuation Date
selected by the Committee after payment of any benefits and/or applicable
withholding taxes shall not exceed the Participant’s vested accrued benefit
under the Plan as of such date, as determined by the Committee, in its sole and
absolute discretion.  The allocation of any amounts creditable as
contributions, income, losses and realized or unrealized appreciation to the
Account of the Participant shall be limited so that the balance as of such
Valuation Date does not exceed the Participant’s accrued benefit under the
Plan.  Any excess shall rather be allocable to other known or
reasonably anticipated liabilities arising under the Plan and/or the
Trust.  The Trustee shall be under no obligation to question such
allocation adjustment.
 
Section
3.5.                                 Maintenance of
Accounts.  Once established, an Account shall be maintained
with respect to the benefits of each Participant until it has been liquidated
through distribution to the Participant, or a Beneficiary thereof.
 
Section
3.6.                                 Taxability of the Trust and
the Participants.
 
(a) It is
intended that the Trust not constitute a “grantor trust” under sections 671
through 679 of the Code, and, notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to
the contrary, the Corporation, as the grantor of the Trust, shall not possess
any power under this Agreement that would cause the Trust to constitute a
“grantor trust.”  It is intended that the Trust constitute a taxable
entity under sections 641 et.
seq. of the Code.  Accordingly, the Trustee acknowledges and
agrees that the Corporation is not the owner of the Trust for Federal income tax
purposes.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the
contrary, none of the powers granted to the Trustee shall be construed to enable
the Corporation, the Trustee or anyone else, to buy, exchange or otherwise deal
with the Fund for less than adequate and full consideration in money or money’s
worth, or to enable the Corporation, the Trustee or any entity in which the
Corporation, the Trustee, or both, have a substantial interest, to borrow from
the Fund, directly or indirectly, without adequate interest or security; no one
but the Trustee (or the Investment Manager) may vote or direct the vote of any
corporate shares or other securities of the Trust, or control the Trust’s
investments or reinvestments by substituting other property of equal value; the
Trustee is not required to surrender Trust assets upon being tendered substitute
assets, regardless of the relative values of the assets involved.
 
(b) The Trust
is a funded trust, and, as such, it is intended that each Participant in respect
of whom an Account is maintained be taxed in accordance with section 402(b) of
the Code.  Consequently, contributions to the Trust by the Corporation
shall be taxable to the Participants in accordance with section 402(b)(1) of the
Code.  (The Corporation shall take a deduction for the amount of such
contributions, for United States Federal income tax purposes in accordance with
section 404(a)(5) of the Code.)  Except as is necessary to satisfy any
Trust obligation, if any, to withhold taxes and to pay over such withheld
amounts to the appropriate taxing authorities, the Trust shall not have any
obligation or liability for the payment of any income, estate, gift or
employment taxes payable by a Participant or Beneficiary, or the estate of a
Participant or Beneficiary, with respect to benefits payable under the
Plan.  The Trustee shall have the responsibility to file any tax
returns, reports or other information as may be required by any Federal, state,
local or other taxing or governmental authority with respect to the Trust, its
income and distribution and withholding therefrom.  Pursuant to
Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 2007-48 or successor guidance thereto,
the Corporation, if required to withhold employment taxes at the time of
contribution, shall withhold and transmit such taxes.  The Corporation
and the Trustee shall comply as required by law to achieve proper reporting in
connection with tax reporting requirements.
 
Section
3.7.                                 Accumulation/Distribution of
Trust Income.  All of the income and gain derived from the Fund
shall be accumulated and allocated to the Accounts of the Participants pursuant
to Section 3.4 hereof; provided, however,
that the Committee shall have the right, in its sole and absolute discretion, to
instruct the Trustee to distribute all or a portion of such income and gain
credited to the Participants’ respective Accounts to the
Participants.
 
Section
3.8.                                 Contributions by the
Corporation for Income Taxes.  If the income and gain derived
by the Trust in any taxable year is subject to United States Federal, state or
local income tax (e.g., because the Committee has elected not to distribute such
income and gain to the Participants) the Trustee shall pay such income taxes
from the Fund except to the extent that the Corporation contributes to the Trust
an amount to enable the Trustee to pay such income taxes.  To the
extent such taxes are paid from the Fund, the Accounts shall be reduced on a
pro-rata basis, subject to Section 3.4.  An amount contributed for
such purpose shall be allocated to each respective applicable Account and the
payment shall be charged against such applicable
Account.  
 
ARTICLE
IV
 
CONTRIBUTIONS,
CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
 
Section
4.1.                                 Contributions to the
Trust.  The Corporation may make such contributions to the
Trust as it shall determine in its sole and absolute discretion, are necessary
to provide benefits to the Participants under the Plan and for the Trust to pay
any income taxes due on its income and gain (as provided in Section 3.8 of this
Agreement).  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
herein, no person, including, without limitation, the Trustee, the Actuary, any
Participant or former Participant, or any Beneficiary thereof, shall have the
right to require the Corporation to make any contribution to the Trust or to
question the accuracy or correctness of any amounts so contributed.
 
Section
4.2.                                 Provision of Benefits is
Binding Obligation of Corporation.  Except to the extent that
benefits to which a Participant, or the Beneficiary thereof, is entitled under
the Plan are actually paid from the Fund, nothing contained in this Agreement
shall relieve the Corporation of its obligations under the Plan to or with
respect to such Participant.
 
Section
4.3.                                 Provision of Reports and
Written Certifications by the Corporation to the Trustee.  The
Corporation shall maintain, and furnish the Trustee with, such reports,
documents, and information as shall be required by the Trustee to carry out its
obligations under this Agreement, including, without limitation, written reports
setting forth the identity of Participants with respect to whose benefits
contributions are made to the Trust and the amount of such contributions, and
the written certifications regarding Participants’ benefits described
below.  At or about the time an Account is established with respect to
the benefits of a Participant, the Corporation shall furnish the Trustee with a
written certification which includes the amount of the Participant’s benefits,
the time or times as of which such benefits shall become payable, the present
value of such benefits as of a specific date or dates, any conditions which must
be satisfied in order for the Participant to become entitled to such benefits,
and the identity of the Participant’s Beneficiary and the specific conditions
under which benefits shall become payable to such Beneficiary.  Such
certifications may be revised by the Corporation at any time, and from time to
time, to reflect, among other things, entitlement of the Participant to
increased benefits or an earlier time of payment under the Plan and to reflect
changes in Beneficiary designations by the Participant.  No
certification shall be revised, nor shall the Trustee be bound by or honor any
such revision, to decrease the benefits of a Participant or to impose additional
or more stringent conditions with respect to a Participant’s eligibility for
benefits.  The Trustee shall rely on the most recent reports,
documents, information, and certifications furnished to it by the Corporation
which comply with the preceding sentence.
 
Section
4.4.                                 Distributions to
Participants.  At such time as a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, is entitled to the receipt of benefits from the Plan, he or
she shall be entitled to receive from the Account maintained with respect to
such Participant the amount in cash or property, as the case may be, to which he
or she is entitled under the terms of the Plan taking into account any prior
distributions made to the Participant under the Plan.  The Trustee
also shall make payments from the Fund to each Participant or Beneficiary
entitled thereto under the Plan in accordance with Section 3.7 hereof upon
direction from the Committee.  All distributions made by the Trust
shall be in accordance with the most recent certification filed with the Trustee
pursuant to and in compliance with Section 4.3 promptly upon receipt of written
direction from the Corporation or upon receipt of evidence submitted by the
Participant satisfactory to the Trustee that the Participant has retired or
otherwise terminated his employment with the Corporation, voluntarily or
otherwise.  The Trustee shall not be required to engage in its own
independent investigation regarding any such payment, but shall provide the
Corporation with written confirmation of the fact and amount of such payment
after it is made.
 
ARTICLE
V
 
ACTUARY
 
Section
5.1.                                 Determination of
Corporation’s Fund Contributions by Actuary.  The Actuary shall
calculate from time to time the amount of the contributions that it estimates
should be made to the Fund by the Corporation for the purpose to accumulate
funds to provide benefits under the Plan; provided, however that, pursuant to
Section 4.1 hereof, the Committee may determine, in its sole and absolute
discretion, whether, and to what extent, the Corporation shall be required to
make contributions to the Fund.
 
Section
5.2.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Actuary.  The Actuary may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Corporation.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received.  The Actuary may be removed by the
Corporation at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Actuary.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Actuary and the Corporation.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, in no event will any such resignation or removal be effective
until a successor Actuary has been appointed upon such resignation or
removal.  Upon the Corporation’s receipt of notice of such resignation
or removal, the Corporation shall appoint a successor Actuary, by written
instrument, to serve commencing on the effective date of the former Actuary’s
resignation or removal.  If a successor is not appointed by the
Corporation within sixty (60) days after the issuance of notice of the Actuary’s
resignation or removal, the Committee shall appoint the successor
Actuary.
 
ARTICLE
VI
 
INVESTMENTS
AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
6.1.                                 Fund Held in
Trust.  The Fund shall be held in trust by the
Trustee.  The sole responsibilities, powers and duties of the Trustee
with respect to the Trust and the Fund shall be as set forth in this
Agreement.  The Trustee shall be a directed trustee only, with no
discretionary authority or responsibility, with respect to the Fund except to
the extent that it has discretion within investment guidelines provided to it in
writing by the Committee.
 
Section
6.2.                                 Types of
Investments.  
 
(a) Except as
otherwise provided in Section 6.4, the Trustee shall invest and reinvest the
assets of the Trust, without distinction between principal and income, pursuant
to investment guidelines delivered to it in a manner which has the primary
purpose of preservation of principal and liquidity of the Fund and, secondarily,
to the extent consistent with the goal to preserve principal and liquidity of
the Fund, which maximizes the income of the Fund.  The Trustee is
expressly authorized to invest the Fund, or any portion thereof, in any
property, real, personal or mixed, wherever situated, and whether or not
productive of income or consisting of wasting assets, including, without
limitation, common and preferred stocks, mutual funds, bonds, notes, debentures,
securities convertible into common stock, leaseholds, mortgages (including,
without limitation, any collective or part interest in any bond and mortgage or
note and mortgage), interest bearing accounts and certificates of deposit, oil,
mineral or gas properties, royalties, interests or rights (including equipment
pertaining thereto), equipment trust certificates, investment trust
certificates, savings bank deposits, and commercial paper, provided that the
assets of the Trust shall at no time be invested in the equity or debt
securities, whether secured or unsecured, of the Corporation, its affiliates or
its trades or businesses except to the extent such security may be held in a
mutual fund.  Pending such investment and reinvestment, the Trustee
may temporarily invest and reinvest the funds, at its discretion, in any
marketable short and medium term fixed income securities, United States Treasury
Bills, other short and medium term government obligations, commercial paper,
other money market instruments and part interests in any one or more of the
foregoing or money market mutual funds, or may maintain cash balances consistent
with the liquidity needs of the Trust as determined by the Trustee.
 
(b) The
Trustee shall, at the direction of the Committee, purchase life insurance and/or
annuity contracts providing flexible funding or similar vehicles or for the
investment of assets in separate accounts invested in any securities and other
property including real estate, regardless of whether or not the insurance
carrier shall have assumed any contractual or other liability as to the benefits
to be provided thereunder, the value thereof, or the return
therefrom.  Such life insurance and/or annuity contracts shall be
considered investments of the Trust and all rights, privileges, options and
elections contained therein shall vest in the Trustee but shall be exercised,
assigned or otherwise disposed of as directed by the Committee.  The
insurance carrier under any such contract shall have full responsibility for the
management and control of the assets held thereunder.
 
Section
6.3.                                 Powers and Authority of
Trustee.  In addition to the powers elsewhere conferred upon
the Trustee under this Agreement and subject to Sections 6.2 and 6.4, the
Trustee shall be authorized and empowered, in its discretion, to exercise any
and all of the following rights, powers and privileges with respect to any cash,
securities or other properties held by the Trustee in trust hereunder, acting in
accordance with written instructions received from the Committee:
 
(a) To sell
any such property at such time and upon such terms and conditions as the Trustee
deems appropriate.  Such sales may be public or private, for cash or
credit, and may be made without notice or advertisement of any
kind.
 
(b) To
exchange, mortgage, pledge or lease any such property and to convey, transfer or
dispose of any such property on such terms and conditions as the Trustee deems
appropriate.
 
(c) To grant
options for the sale, transfer, exchange or disposal of any such
property.
 
(d) To
exercise all voting rights pertaining to any securities; to consent to or
request any action on the part of the issuer of any such securities; and to give
general or special proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of
substitution.
 
(e) To
consent to or participate in amalgamations, reorganizations, recapitalizations,
consolidations, mergers, liquidations or similar transactions with respect to
any securities, and to accept and to hold any other securities issued in
connection therewith.
 
(f) To
exercise any subscription rights or conversion privileges with respect to any
securities held in the Fund.
 
(g) To
collect and receive any and all money and other property of whatsoever kind or
nature due or owing or belonging to the Fund and to give full discharge and
acquittance therefor; and to extend the time of payment of any obligation at any
time owing to the Fund, as long as such extension is for a reasonable period and
continues to bear reasonable interest.
 
(h) To cause
any securities or other property to be registered in, or transferred to, the
individual name of the Trustee or in the name of one or more of its nominees, or
one or more nominees of any system for the centralized handling of securities,
but the books and records of the Trust shall at all times show that all such
investments are a part of the Fund.
 
(i) To
organize under the laws of any state a corporation for the purpose of acquiring
and holding title to any property which the Trustee is authorized to acquire
under this Agreement and to exercise with respect thereto any or all of the
powers set forth in this  Agreement.
 
(j) To
manage, operate, repair, improve, develop, preserve, mortgage or lease for any
period any real property or any oil, mineral or gas properties, royalties,
interest or rights held by it directly or through any corporation, either alone
or by joining with others, using other Trust assets for any of such purposes; to
modify, extend, renew, waive or otherwise adjust any or all of the provisions of
any such mortgage or lease; and to make provision for amortization of the
investment in or depreciation of the value of such property.
 
(k) To
settle, compromise, or submit to arbitration any claims, debts or damages due or
owing to or from the Trust; to commence or defend suits or legal proceedings
whenever, in its judgment, any interest of the Trust requires it; and to
represent the Trust in all suits or legal proceedings in any court of law or
equity or before any other body or tribunal, insofar as such suits or
proceedings relate to any property forming part of the Fund or to the
administration of the Fund.
 
(l) To borrow
money from itself or others for the purposes of the Trust.
 
(m) To
purchase, hold and sell interests or units of participation in any collective or
common trust fund established by the Trustee, including any such funds which may
be established in the future.
 
(n) Generally
to do all acts, whether or not expressly authorized which the Trustee deems
necessary or appropriate to perform its duties and discharge its
responsibilities under this Agreement.
 
(o) To retain
the services of outside legal counsel and/or other professionals as may be
necessary to assist it in connection with the administration of the Trust and/or
management or conservation of the Fund’s assets, including defending the Trust
from attack, claims or litigation regarding its assets.
 
(p) To pay
expenses of the Trust that are incurred in connection with the administration of
the Trust and/or the management of the Fund’s assets.
 
Section
6.4.                                 Investment of Fund by
Investment Manager.  
 
(a) Appointment of Investment
Manager.  The Committee may appoint one or more Investment
Managers, which may be the Trustee or an affiliate of the Trustee, to manage
(including the power to acquire and dispose of) all or any of the assets of the
Fund.  In the event of such appointment, the Committee shall establish
the portion of the assets of the Fund that shall be subject to the management of
any such Investment Manager and shall notify the Trustee in writing of such
appointment and the assets subject to the Investment Manager’s
discretion.  If there shall be more than one Investment Manager, the
portion of the Fund to be invested by each such Investment Manager shall be held
in a separate account and the powers and authority of each such Investment
Manager shall be divided as set forth in the instruments appointing such
Investment Managers.  To the maximum extent permitted by law, the
Trustee shall be protected in assuming that the appointment of an Investment
Manager remains in effect until it is otherwise notified by the Committee in
writing.  With respect to the assets over which an Investment Manager
has investment responsibility, the Investment Manager shall possess all of the
investment powers and responsibilities granted to the Committee hereunder, and
the Trustee shall invest and reinvest such assets pursuant to the direction of
the Investment Manager.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent
so provided in the document by which the Investment Manager accepts its
appointment, the Committee may:
 
(i)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments shall be
made or liquidated;
 
(ii)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments not be
made; and
 
(iii)           Require
that the Investment Manager obtain approval from the Committee prior to
acquiring or disposing of all or any assets under its control.
 
(b) Successor Investment
Manager.  The Committee may terminate its appointment of an
Investment Manager at any time and shall in writing notify the Trustee of such
termination, and may thereafter appoint a successor Investment Manager in the
same manner as provided in this Section 6.4.  Such successor
Investment Manager shall thereafter, until its appointment shall be terminated,
be deemed to be an Investment Manager for all purposes of this
Agreement.  In the event that a Committee does not exist, the Trustee
shall terminate any Investment Manager that is not an affiliate of the Trustee
and shall immediately appoint its affiliate, Evergreen Investments, as
Investment Manager.
 
(c) Effect of Appointment of
Investment Manager on Trustee.  So long as an Investment
Manager (other than the Trustee or one of its affiliates) is serving as such,
the Trustee shall be under no duty or obligation to review the assets comprising
any portion of the Fund managed by the Investment Manager, to make any
recommendations with respect to the investment or reinvestment thereof, or to
determine whether any direction received from any Investment Manager is proper
or within the terms of this Agreement or to monitor the activities of any
Investment Manager.  The Trustee shall have no liability or
responsibility to the Corporation, the Committee or any persons claiming any
interest in the Fund for acting without question on the direction of, or for
failing to act in the absence of any direction from, the Committee or any
Investment Manager unless the Trustee participated knowingly in, or knowingly
undertook to conceal, an act or omission of the Committee or of any Investment
Manager constituting a breach of its duties hereunder, knowing such act or
omission was a breach of such duties; provided, however, that the Trustee shall
not be deemed to have “participated” in a breach (i) by the Committee or to have
“knowledge” of any such breach as a result of accepting any property contributed
to the Trust in the Corporation’s discretion or retaining such property as an
investment for the Fund at the Committee’s direction; and (ii) by the Committee
or any Investment Manager for the purposes of this undertaking solely as a
result of the performance by the Trustee or its officers, employees or agents of
any custodial, reporting, recording, and bookkeeping functions with respect to
any assets of the Fund managed by any Investment Manager, or with respect to
which the Trustee has received directions from the Committee, or solely as a
result of settling purchase and sale transactions entered into or directed by
any Investment Manager or the Committee, or to have “knowledge” of any such
breach solely as a result of the information received by the Trustee or its
officers, employees or agents in the normal course in performing such functions,
or settling such transactions.  If the Trustee has actual knowledge of
a breach committed by an Investment Manager, it shall promptly notify the
Committee in writing thereof, and the Trustee, except as required by applicable
law, shall thereafter have no responsibility to remedy such breach.
 
Section
6.5.                                 Making Benefit
Payments.  Upon receipt of direction from the Corporation
consistent with certifications theretofore delivered to the Trustee pursuant to
Section 4.3, the Trustee shall promptly make benefit payments.  All
returns, records and forms required to be filed with the Federal, state and
local taxing authorities or delivered to each Participant and Beneficiary shall
be filed by the Corporation and/or Trustee in accordance with applicable law for
periods commencing with the Effective Date.  Except as provided in
this Agreement, all income taxes required to be paid by each Participant (and
any returns, records and forms required with respect to such taxes) shall be the
sole responsibility of such Participant.
 
Section
6.6.                                 Deposit of Contributions by
Trustee.  The Trustee shall accept for deposit in the Fund all
contributions in cash made by the Corporation under this Agreement and shall
promptly acknowledge receipt of same.  The Trustee shall have no
responsibility to determine or to question the accuracy or correctness of any
amounts so contributed.
 
Section
6.7.                                 Dealings with the
Trustee.  Persons dealing with the Trustee shall be under no
obligation to see to the proper application of any money paid or property
delivered to the Trustee or to inquire into the Trustee’s authority as to any
transaction.
 
Section
6.8.                                 Use of Fund Assets to Pay
Trust Expenses.  If the amount in the Expense Account is
insufficient to pay the expenses of the Trust, the Trustee may, in its
discretion or at the discretion of the Committee, use assets of the Fund (other
than those deposited in the Expense Account) to pay the expenses of the Trust,
including, without limitation, any (i) legal or other professional expenses
incurred in connection with the management, protection or conservation of the
assets of the Fund and (ii) insurance premiums that may be incurred with respect
to any fiduciary liability insurance that may be obtained by the Trust to cover
potential claims for indemnification that may be made by members of the
Committee pursuant to Section 10.3 of this Agreement.
 
ARTICLE
VII
 
DUTIES
OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
7.1.                                 General Duties of the
Trustee.  
 
(a) It shall
be the duty of the Trustee to protect and conserve all property received by it
hereunder which, together with the income and gains therefrom and additions
thereto, shall constitute the Fund.  The Trustee shall manage, invest
and reinvest the Fund, collect the income thereof, and make payments therefrom,
all as herein provided.
 
(b) The
Trustee shall discharge its duties with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence
under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like
capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of a like character and with like aims, and, in accordance with the
documents and instruments governing the Plan and the Trust.
 
Section
7.2.                                 Valuation of
Fund.  The Trustee shall value the Fund as of each Valuation
Date at current fair market value and shall report the results of such valuation
to the Committee.  The Trustee shall value the assets of the Trust at
market and on such other basis or bases (including, without limitation, cost) as
the Committee shall reasonably request.  The market value of the
assets shall be equal to the market value of the securities and other assets in
the Fund, plus cash, interest, dividends and other sums received and accrued but
not yet invested.  The market value of the securities and other assets
in the Fund shall be based on such market quotations and other information as
are available to the Trustee and as may in the Trustee’s discretion be
appropriate.
 
Section
7.3.                                 Reports and
Records.  The Trustee shall:
 
(a) Keep
accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and
other transactions in the Fund as it shall deem necessary and proper with
respect to its administration of the Trust, and permit inspection of such
accounts, records and assets of the Trust by any duly authorized representative
of the Corporation, the members of the Committee or the Participants during
regular business hours.
 
(b) Within
sixty (60) days (or such shorter period of time as the Corporation shall
reasonably request) following the close of the accounting year, and at such
other intervals as are mutually agreed to by the Trustee, the Corporation and
the Committee, the Trustee shall file with the Corporation, the Committee and,
unless the Corporation otherwise directs in writing, the Participants a written
account with respect to the transactions effected by the Trustee during such
accounting year or other period.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall file written objections, if any, with respect to the propriety of the
Trustee’s acts and transactions shown in such account within a period of ninety
(90) days from the date of filing such annual or other account.  If
within ninety (90) days after the receipt of the account or any amended account
the Corporation or the Committee has not signed and returned a counterpart to
the Trustee, nor filed with the Trustee notice of any objection to any act or
transaction of the Trustee, the account or amended account shall become an
account settled as between the Trustee and the Corporation and/or the
Committee.  If any objection has been filed, and if the Corporation
and/or the Committee are satisfied that it should be withdrawn or if the account
is adjusted to their satisfaction, the Corporation and/or the Committee shall in
writing filed with the Trustee signify their approval of the account, and the
account shall become an account settled as between the Trustee and the
Corporation and the Committee.
 
When an
account becomes an account settled, such account shall be finally settled, and
the Trustee shall be completely discharged and released, as if such account had
been settled and allowed by a judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction in an action or proceeding in which the Trustee, the Corporation,
the Committee and all persons having or claiming to have any interest in the
Fund or under the Plan were parties.
 
The
Trustee, the Corporation or the Committee shall have the right to apply at any
time to a court of competent jurisdiction for judicial settlement of any account
of the Trustee not previously settled as hereinabove provided.  In any
such action or proceeding it shall be necessary to join as parties only the
Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee (although the Trustee may also join
other parties as it deems appropriate), and any judgment or decree entered
therein shall be conclusive.
 
(c) Make such
periodic reports to the Corporation and the Committee as may be mutually agreed
to by the Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee, as
applicable.
 
(d) Prepare
and timely file such tax returns and such other reports and documents, together
with supporting data and schedules, as may be required of the Trustee by law,
with any taxing authority or any other government authority, whether local,
state or Federal.
 
(e) Provide
the Participants with copies of all such reports, returns, filings and documents
required by law, and cooperate with the Corporation in the filing of tax reports
and returns required to be filed by applicable law.
 
Section
7.4.                                 No Duty to Advance Funds or
to Administer the Plan.  The Trustee shall have no obligation
to advance its own funds for the purpose of fulfilling its responsibilities
under this Agreement, and its obligation to incur expenses shall at all times be
limited to amounts in the Trust available to be applied toward such
expenses.  The Trustee shall not be responsible in any respect for
administering the Plan.
 
Section
7.5.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Trustee.  The Trustee may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Committee.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received, or such earlier date as may be agreed to by the
Trustee and the Committee.  In addition, the Trustee may be removed by
the Committee at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Trustee.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Trustee and the Committee.
 
Upon the
Committee’s receipt of notice of such resignation or removal, the Committee
shall appoint a successor Trustee by written instrument, to serve commencing on
the effective date of the former Trustee’s resignation or removal.  If
a successor is not appointed by the Committee within sixty (60) days after the
issuance of notice of the Trustee’s resignation or removal, the Trustee may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of his or its
successor.  All expenses of the Trustee in connection with the
proceeding shall be allowed as an administration expense of the
Trust.  The Trustee shall continue to serve until a successor accepts
the Trust and receives delivery of the Fund.  The appointment of a
successor Trustee shall be effective when accepted in writing by the new
Trustee.  Upon the successor Trustee’s acceptance of appointment and
after the final account of the former Trustee has been settled, the former
Trustee shall transfer and deliver the Fund to such successor.  The
former Trustee shall exercise any instrument necessary or reasonably required by
the Committee or the successor Trustee to evidence the
transfer.  Moreover, the former Trustee shall deliver to the successor
Trustee the originals of all reports, records, documents, and other written
information in its possession regarding the Plan, the Fund, and the Participants
and shall deliver copies thereof to the Committee and to a person designated by
a majority of the persons who are Participants (or the Beneficiary of a deceased
Participant) on the date of such resignation or removal, and thereupon shall be
entitled to all unpaid compensation, fees and reimbursements to which it is
entitled under this Agreement and shall be relieved of all responsibilities and
duties under this Agreement.
 
All of
the provisions set forth herein with respect to the Trustee shall relate to each
successor with the same force and effect as if such successor had been
originally named as a Trustee hereunder.  Any successor Trustee shall
have the same powers, rights and duties as its predecessor and shall have the
same title to the Fund as its predecessor.
 
The
successor Trustee need not examine the records and accounts of any prior
Trustee.  The successor Trustee shall not be responsible for, and the
Corporation shall indemnify and defend the successor Trustee from, any claim or
liability resulting from any action or inaction of any prior Trustee or from any
other past event, or any condition existing at the time it becomes successor
Trustee.
 
ARTICLE
VIII
 
COMPENSATION,
IMMUNITIES
 
AND
INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
8.1.                                 Trustee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Trustee shall be entitled to such compensation
and fees for its services under this Agreement as shall be agreed upon from time
to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the Corporation shall
reimburse the Trustee for any expenses incurred by it, including, but not
limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the Trustee, and reasonable
fees for legal services rendered to the Trustee (whether or not rendered in
connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding).  Such
compensation, fees and reimbursement shall be paid to the Trustee pursuant to
the terms set forth at Section 8.2 of this Agreement.  The Trustee’s
entitlement to compensation, fees or reimbursement hereunder shall not be
affected by the resignation or removal of the Trustee or the termination of the
Trust.
 
Section
8.2.                                 Expense
Account.  The Corporation may from time to time make
contributions to the Fund to be held in an Expense Account and to be utilized to
pay the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and
other expenses of the Trust.  To the extent that there are monies in
the Expense Account, the Trustee shall utilize such Expense Account for payment
of the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee, for
payment of the indemnities referred to in Section 8.4 and 10.3, and for other
expenses of the Trust, and, in the absence of sufficient monies, shall seek
reimbursement from the Corporation.  In the event that the Corporation
shall fail or refuse to make such reimbursement within sixty (60) days of
demand, the Trustee may satisfy such obligations out of the other assets of the
Fund in such manner as the Trustee deems to be reasonable in the circumstances,
taking into account the amount of liquid assets, the anticipated needs to make
distributions to Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof), and such other
factors as the Trustee deems relevant.  If the Trustee satisfies any
obligations of the Corporation to pay fees and expenses from other Fund assets,
the Corporation shall immediately upon demand by the Trustee deposit into the
Trust an amount of cash equal to the amount paid from such assets if, at that
time, the Trustee could not replace such shares or assets with a cash amount
equal to the liquidation value of such shares or assets.  If such
funds are not deposited or assets replaced within sixty (60) days of such
demand, the Trustee may, in its sole and absolute discretion, commence legal
action against the Corporation for recovery of the amount paid out of the
Fund.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no amount held
in the Expense Account shall be used for purposes other than paying the
compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other
expenses of the Trust, and shall not be distributed to or for the benefit of the
Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof).
 
Section
8.3.                                 Immunities.  The
Trustee shall have the following privileges and immunities:
 
(a) The
Corporation and the Committee shall furnish the Trustee with instruments
evidencing individuals designated by the Corporation or the Committee, as the
case may be, who are empowered to give directions, statements, or certificates
to the Trustee.  A written direction, statement or certificate to the
Trustee signed by any such individual shall be deemed to be the direction,
statement or certificate of the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may
be, and the Trustee may rely upon such directions, statements, or certificates
to the extent not prohibited by law.  The Corporation and the
Committee shall furnish the Trustee from time to time with instruments
evidencing the termination of such designated individuals or the appointment of
new such designated individuals and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely upon
such instruments as evidence of the identity and authority of such designated
individuals and shall not be charged with notice of any change with respect
thereto until the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may be, has
furnished the Trustee with instruments relative to such change.
 
(b) The
Trustee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Trustee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Trustee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties it may
see fit.  In the event that the Trustee does delegate such ministerial
duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person to whom these
duties have been delegated.  The Trustee shall be reimbursed by the
Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal counsel, agents and
expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section 8.2 of this
Agreement.
 
Section
8.4.                                 Indemnity of the
Trustee.  
 
(a) The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds the Trustee harmless from and against
any and all losses, damages, costs, expenses or liabilities, including
reasonable fees for legal services and other costs of litigation, to which the
Trustee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by, incurred
in connection with, or in any way associated with this Agreement, including any
reasonable discretionary action which the Trustee may take under the Trust,
except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct of the Trustee.  If one or more liabilities shall arise, or
if the Corporation fails to indemnify the Trustee as provided herein, or both,
then the Trustee may engage counsel of the Trustee’s choice, but at the
Corporation’s expense, either to conduct the defense against such liabilities,
or to conduct such actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided
for herein, or to take both such actions.  The Trustee shall notify
the Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Trustee has engaged counsel
of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b) If the
Trustee shall be entitled to indemnification by the Corporation pursuant to this
Section 8.4, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification upon
demand, the Trustee may apply the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction of the
obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by the
Trustee against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in behalf of
the Trust.
 
Section
8.5.                                 Determination of Interests
in the Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal Proceedings.  The
interest of the Participants (and the Beneficiaries thereof) in the Fund shall
be determined in accordance with the terms of the Plan.  The Trustee
shall have no duty to question any direction given by the Corporation or the
Committee to the Trustee, including any direction advising the Trustee as to
such interests under the Plan.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall have authority to enforce this Agreement.  To protect the Fund
from the expenses which might otherwise be incurred, no person other than the
Corporation or the Committee may institute or maintain any action or proceeding
against the Trustee or the Fund, or join in any such action or proceeding, in
the absence of written authorization by the Corporation or the
Committee.   Except as otherwise provided in this Section 8.5, in
any action or proceeding affecting the Fund, the only necessary parties shall be
the Corporation, the Committee and the Trustee, and no other person shall be
entitled to any notice or process.
 
ARTICLE
IX
 
AMENDMENT
AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST
 
Section
9.1.                                 Amendment of
Agreement.  By a duly executed, written instrument delivered to
the Trustee and acknowledged in the same form as this Agreement, the Corporation
shall have the right at any time and from time to time to amend this Agreement
in whole or in part, except that (i) the duties and responsibilities of the
Trustee or the Committee shall not be increased, and the protections afforded to
the Trustee or the Committee shall not be impaired without the written consent
of the Trustee or the Committee, as the case may be; (ii) the protection
afforded with respect to obligations payable to or on behalf of the Participants
hereunder may not be impaired without the unanimous written consent of the
Participants; and (iii) the Corporation shall not have the power to revoke this
Trust or to revest title in itself to the assets comprising the
Fund.  Any such amendment shall be effective upon (a) delivery of such
amendment to the Trustee and the Committee, together with a certified copy of
the resolution of the Board of Directors of the Corporation or of its
Compensation Committee, as the case may be; and (b) endorsement by each the
Trustee and the Committee on such instrument upon receipt thereof, together with
any required consent or consents thereto.  No such amendment shall
adversely affect any benefits accrued under the Plan with respect to the
Participants.  All instruments amending this Agreement shall be noted
upon or kept attached to the executed original of this Agreement.
 
Section
9.2.                                 Termination of
Agreement.  This Agreement may not be terminated until the
liability of the Corporation for the payment of all benefits to all
Participants, and the Beneficiaries thereof, has been satisfied in full or until
such time as no funds remain on deposit in the Fund pursuant to this Agreement;
provided, however, that with the written consent of a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, the Committee may terminate this Agreement at any time with
respect to such consenting Participant or
Beneficiary.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this
Trust shall terminate no later than twenty-one (21) years after the death of the
last survivor of all of the Participants included in the original list of
Participants as constituted prior to this Restated and Amended Agreement, and
those persons now living who have been designated as Beneficiaries of such
Participants in accordance with the terms of the Plan.
 
ARTICLE
X
 
THE
COMMITTEE
 
Section
10.1.                                 Membership and Actions of
the Committee.  
 
(a) The
Committee shall at all times consist of a minimum of three (3) individuals, all
of whom shall be Participants.  Any member of the Committee may resign
upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the
Corporation.  Moreover, any member of the Committee may be removed at
any time by the Corporation.
 
(b) In the
event of a vacancy on the Committee, the other member(s) of the Committee shall
appoint a successor.  In the event that there is at any time no member
of the Committee then in office, successor members shall be appointed by the
Corporation.
 
(c) Any
action by the Committee shall require the written approval of at least a
majority of the members of the Committee.  A Committee member shall
not be liable hereunder for any act taken, or omitted to be taken, in good
faith, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct by such Committee member.
 
(d) All of
the provisions set forth herein with respect to a member of the Committee shall
relate to each successor with the same force and effect as if such successor had
been originally named as a member of the Committee.
 
(e) The
Committee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Committee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Committee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties as it
may see fit.  In the event that the Committee does delegate such
ministerial duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person
to whom these duties have been delegated.  The Committee members shall
be reimbursed by the Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal
counsel, agents and expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section
8.2 of this Agreement
 
Section
10.2.                                 Committee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Committee members shall be entitled to such
compensation and fees for their services under this Agreement as shall be agreed
upon from time to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the
Corporation shall reimburse the Committee members for any expenses incurred by
them, including, but not limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the
Committee members, and reasonable fees for legal services rendered to the
Committee (whether or not rendered in connection with a judicial or
administrative proceeding).  Such compensation, fees and reimbursement
shall be paid to the Committee members pursuant to the terms set forth at
Section 8.2 of this Agreement.  The Committee members’ entitlement to
compensation, fees or reimbursement hereunder shall not be affected by the
resignation or removal of any member or members of the Committee or the
termination of the Trust.
 
Section
10.3.                                 Indemnity of
Committee.  
 
(a) The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds each member of the Committee harmless
from and against any and all liabilities, including reasonable fees for legal
services and other costs of litigation, to which each such member of the
Committee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by,
incurred in connection with, or in any way associated with this Trust or
Agreement, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or
willful misconduct of such member of the Committee.  If one or more
liabilities shall arise, or if the Corporation fails to indemnify such member of
the Committee as provided herein, or both, then the Committee member may engage
counsel of the Committee member’s choice, but at the Corporation’s expense,
either to conduct the defense against such liabilities, or to conduct such
actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided for herein, or to
take both such actions.  The Committee member shall notify the
Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Committee member has so engaged
counsel of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b) If a
Committee member shall be entitled to indemnification pursuant to this Section
10.3, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification upon demand,
the Trustee shall satisfy any indemnity to a Committee member pursuant to this
Section 10.3 out of the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction of the
obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by the
Committee member against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in
behalf of the Trust.
 
ARTICLE
XI
 
MISCELLANEOUS
 
Section
11.1.                                 Governing
Law.  This Trust is created and accepted in the State of
Delaware.  All questions pertaining to the validity or construction of
this Agreement and the acts and transactions of the parties hereto and their
respective successors shall be determined in accordance with the laws of the
State of Texas, except as to matters governed by Federal law.
 
Section
11.2.                                 No Effect on
Employment.  Nothing contained in this Agreement shall create,
or be construed or interpreted to create, any new or additional obligations on
the part of the Corporation or its affiliates to retain any person in its employ
or interfere in any way with the right of the Corporation to discharge any
employee.
 
Section
11.3.                                 Successors.  This
Agreement shall be binding upon, and the powers herein granted to the
Corporation and the Trustee, respectively, shall be exercisable by, the
respective successors and assigns of the Corporation and the
Trustee.
 
Section
11.4.                                 Severability.  Should
any provision of this Agreement be determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unlawful or unenforceable, such determination shall not
adversely affect the remaining provisions of this Agreement, unless it shall
make impossible the maintenance or operation of the Trust for its intended
purposes.  To the extent any provision of this Agreement is determined
to be unlawful or unenforceable, this Agreement shall be construed to be carried
out to the fullest extent possible in a lawful and enforceable
manner.
 
Section
11.5.                                 Incorporation of Plan as
Part of Agreement.  The Plan is expressly incorporated herein
and made a part hereof with the same force and effect as if fully set
forth.  The Corporation shall deliver to the Trustee a copy of all
amendments to the Plan hereafter adopted.
 
Section
11.6.                                   Execution in
Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of
counterparts, each of which shall be considered an original and said
counterparts shall constitute but one and the same instrument.
 
Section
11.7.                                 Effect of Divisions and
Captions.  The division of this Agreement into articles,
paragraphs, sections and subsections and the use of captions are solely for
convenience and shall have no legal effect in construing the provisions of this
Agreement.
 
Section
11.8.                                 Gender and
Number.  Whenever the masculine, feminine, or neuter gender is
used inappropriately in this Agreement, this Agreement shall be read as if the
appropriate gender was used, and, unless the context otherwise requires, the
singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
 
Section
11.9.                                 Mistake of
Fact.  A misstatement or other mistake of fact relating to this
Agreement shall be corrected when it becomes known, and the Committee shall make
such adjustment on account thereof as it considers equitable and practicable;
provided that no adjustment under this Section 11.9 shall be made which violates
any provision of section 409A of the Code or any guidance issued
thereunder.
 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the Corporation, the Trustee and the Committee have entered in
to this Agreement as of NOVEMBER 17, 2008, effective as of the Effective
Date.
 
CORPORATION:
 
AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.,
a Delaware corporation
 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Kenneth
W. Wimberly, Corporate Secretary
 

 
TRUSTEE:
 
WACHOVIA
BANK,                                           NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION


Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;

Name:                                                                        

Title:                                                                        
 

 
COMMITTEE:
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Gerard J.
Arpey
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Thomas W.
Horton
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Jeffrey
J. Brundage
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Gary F.
Kennedy
 



EX-10.129
20
ex10129.htm
TRUST AGREEMENT UNDER SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM FOR OFFICERS PARTICIPATING IN DC PLAN

ex10129.htm
























TRUST
AGREEMENT
UNDER
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.
PARTICIPATING IN THE $UPER $AVER PLUS
PLAN



Amended
and Restated effective June 1, 2007
ARTICLE
I
 



DAL02:442056.6
003154.0122 

 



 






 



TABLE OF
CONTENTS

 
 
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    1.1.


Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.2.


Actuary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.3.


Beneficiary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.4.


Code 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.5.


Committee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.6.


Compensation
      Committee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.7.


Corporation 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.8.


Expense
      Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.9.


Fund 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.10.Investment
      Manager

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.11.Participant

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.12.Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.13.$uper $aver Plus
      Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.14.Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.15.Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.16.Valuation
    Date

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
II CREATION, PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    2.1.


Purpose of the Trust; Separate
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    2.2.


Administration of the
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    2.3.


Irrevocable; Not Subject to
      Creditor Claims 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    2.4.


Secured Interest; Separate
      Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
III ACCOUNTS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    3.1.


Fund and
      Accounts. 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.2.


Written Certifications Provided
      by Corporation to the Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.3.


Benefits
      Payable 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.4.


Account
      Adjustment 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.5.


Maintenance of
      Accounts 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.6.


Taxability of the Trust and the
      Participants 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.7.


Accumulation/Distribution of
      Trust Income 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.8.


Contributions by the Corporation
      for Income Taxes 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IV CONTRIBUTIONS, CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    4.1.


Contributions to the
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    4.2.


Provision of Benefits is Binding
      Obligation of Corporation 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    4.3.


Provision of Reports and Written
      Certifications by the Corporation to the
    Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    4.4.


Distributions to
      Participants 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE V
ACTUARY [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    5.1.


Determination of Corporation’s
      Fund Contributions by Actuary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    5.2.


Resignation/Removal of
      Actuary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VI INVESTMENTS AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    6.1.


Fund Held in
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.2.


Types of
      Investments 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.3.


Powers and Authority of
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.4.


Investment of Fund by Investment
      Manager 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.5.


Making Benefit
      Payments 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.6.


Deposit of Contributions by
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.7.


Dealings with the
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.8.


Use of Fund Assets to Pay Trust
      Expenses 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VII DUTIES OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    7.1.


General Duties of the
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.2.


Valuation of
      Fund 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.3.


Reports and
      Records 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.4.


No Duty to Advance Funds or to
      Administer the Plan 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.5.


Resignation/Removal of
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VIII COMPENSATION, IMMUNITIES  AND INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    8.1.


Trustee Compensation and
      Expenses 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.2.


Expense
      Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.3.


Immunities 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.4.


Indemnity of the
      Trustee. 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.5.


Determination of Interests in the
      Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal
    Proceedings 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IX AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    9.1.


Amendment of
      Agreement 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    9.2.


Termination of
      Agreement 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE X
THE COMMITTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section 10.1.Membership and Actions of the
      Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 10.2.Committee Compensation and
      Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 10.3.Indemnity of
      Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
XI MISCELLANEOUS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section 11.1.Governing
    Law

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.2.No Effect on
      Employment

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.3.Successors

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.4.Severability

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.5.Incorporation of Plan as Part of
      Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.6.Execution in
      Counterparts

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.7.Effect of Divisions and
      Captions

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.8.Gender and
      Number

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.9.Mistake of
      Fact

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]






ARTICLE
I
 


 



 






 



TRUST
AGREEMENT
UNDER
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.
PARTICIPATING IN THE $UPER $AVER PLUS
PLAN
 
THIS
AGREEMENT (the or this “Agreement”) was made and adopted effective as of the
15th day of September, 2005, by and between AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC. (the
“Corporation”), a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State
of Delaware, and WACHOVIA BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION (the “Trustee”), a national
association organized and existing under the laws of the United States, and the
individuals constituting the Committee described in Section 10.1 (the
“Committee”).  By this instrument, the Corporation hereby amends and
restates the Agreement in the entirety, effective as of June 1, 2007 (the
“Effective Date”).
 
RECITALS
 
WHEREAS, in January 1985, the
Board of Directors of AMR Corporation
established the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of
American Airlines, Inc., as subsequently amended (the “Plan”), for the purpose
of paying retirement benefits to certain officers of the Corporation who are participants in the Plan
(the “Participants”), and the Plan was subsequently amended to provide
retirement benefits to certain officers of the Corporation who are participants
in the Plan (the “Participants”) and in the $uper $aver Plus Plan (the “$uper
$aver Plus Plan”); and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation has
established an irrevocable trust to fund certain retirement benefits of the
Participants of the Plan who are participants in the $uper $aver Plus Plan;
and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires the Trustee to continue to undertake the responsibility for the
protection and conservation of the assets of the Trust, under the terms of the
Agreement; the Trustee is willing to continue such responsibility, and the
Corporation has delivered assets to the Trustee to hold in trust for the purpose
of accumulating funds to pay benefits under the Plan as they become due and
payable; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires that the Committee under the Plan be responsible for the administration
of the Trust, and the Committee has undertaken the responsibility and duties of
the Committee pursuant to the terms of the Agreement; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
intends the Trust to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax purposes,
whereby the Participants will be subject to current taxation on the funds held
in the Trust; and
 
WHEREAS, the trust established
by this Agreement is not intended to be a “grantor trust” pursuant to sections
671 through 679 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”),
but is intended to be a taxable trust pursuant to section 641 et seq. of the Code;
and
 
WHEREAS, subsequently to the
Effective Date, Revenue Ruling 2007-48 has been issued by the U.S. Treasury
Department, and the Corporation desires to update the Agreement so that the
Trust continues to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax
purposes;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in
consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the Corporation, the
Trustee and the Committee hereby amend and restate the Agreement in the
entirety, to provide as follows:
 
ARTICLE
I                                
 
DEFINITIONS
 
Each word
or phrase used herein which is in quotations shall have the meaning set forth in
this Article I, unless a different meaning is clearly required by
context.
 
Section
1.1.                                 Account.  “Account”
means the separate account established and maintained under the Fund with
respect to each Participant to provide a source of funds for the benefits
payable by the Corporation to, or with respect to, each such Participant under
the Plan who is also a participant under the $uper $aver Plus Plan.
 
Section
1.2.                                 Actuary.  “Actuary”
means the then acting actuary or firm of actuaries employed by the Corporation
to advise the Corporation with respect to contributions to be made under the
Plan.  The initial Actuary shall be Towers, Perrin, Forster &
Crosby, Inc. and Subsidiaries.  
 
Section
1.3.                                 Beneficiary.  “Beneficiary”
holds the identical definition of the term as defined in the Plan.
 
Section
1.4.                                 Code.  “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
Section
1.5.                                 Committee.  “Committee”
means the committee of persons to whom the Corporation has delegated the
responsibility of the Trust’s administration.
 
Section
1.6.                                 Compensation
Committee.  “Compensation Committee” means the compensation
committee of the Board of Directors of AMR Corporation.  
 
Section
1.7.                                 Corporation.  “Corporation”
means American Airlines, Inc. and any
successor thereto, or to the business thereof, by whatever form or manner
resulting.
 
Section
1.8.                                 Expense
Account.  “Expense Account” means
a separate account of the Fund whereby the Corporation may make
contributions to be utilized by the Trustee to pay the compensation, fees and
expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other expenses of the
Trust.
 
Section
1.9.                                 Fund.  “Fund”
means the money and property held by the Trustee under this
Agreement.
 
Section
1.10.                                 Investment
Manager.  “Investment Manager” means the then acting manager of
all or any of the assets of the Fund that is appointed by the Committee to
exercise investment responsibility with respect to all or such portion of the
Fund as determined by the Committee.
 
Section
1.11.                                 Participant.  “Participant”
means an
“Active Funding Participant” in the Plan (as defined at Section 2.1(b) of the
Plan) who is a Participant in the $uper $aver Plus
Plan.  
 
Section
1.12.                                 Plan.  “Plan”
means the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American
Airlines, Inc. originally effective January 1, 1985, and as amended from time to
time, including certain retirement benefits heretofore authorized and which may
hereafter be authorized to be payable to certain employees of the
Corporation.  
 
Section
1.13.                                 $uper $aver Plus
Plan.  “$uper $aver Plus Plan”
means Supplement 9 of the $uper $aver A 401(k) Capital Accumulation Plan for
Employees of Participating AMR Corporation Subsidiaries originally effective
July 1, 1988, and as amended from time to time.  
 
Section
1.14.                                 Trust.  “Trust” means the trust provided for
under this Agreement.
 
Section
1.15.                                 Trustee.  “Trustee”
means the then acting trustee of the Trust.  The initial trustee of
the Trust is Wachovia Bank, National Association.
 
Section
1.16.                                 Valuation
Date.  “Valuation Date” means (i) the last business day of each
calendar quarter; (ii) in the case of a Participant who retires or whose
employment with the Corporation is terminated for any reason, the last business
day of the calendar month coincident with or immediately preceding the date of
such retirement or termination; and (iii) each other date or dates specified by
the Committee to the Trustee for the valuation of the Fund and adjustment of
Accounts.
 
ARTICLE
II                                
 
CREATION,
PURPOSE AND
 
ADMINISTRATION
OF THE TRUST
 
Section
2.1.                                 Purpose of the Trust;
Separate Trust.  This Trust is established by the Corporation,
the Trustee and the Committee for the purpose of accumulating funds to pay
benefits under the Plan.  Payments from the Fund to Participants or
their Beneficiaries shall be in discharge of the Corporation’s liability under
the terms of the Plan to such Participants, to the extent such benefits are paid
from the Fund.  The Corporation intends that each Account established
pursuant to Article III be treated as a separate trust designed to satisfy, in
whole or in part, the Corporation’s liability under the Plan to each Participant
with respect to whom such Account is maintained.
 
Section
2.2.                                 Administration of the
Trust.  The Committee shall be solely responsible for the
administration of the Trust.  The Committee shall, upon request of the
Trustee, furnish the Trustee with such reasonable information as is necessary or
appropriate for the Trustee to carry out its responsibilities under this
Agreement, and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the
information received from the Committee.  The Corporation shall be
responsible for the administration of the Plan.  The Corporation shall,
upon request of either the Committee or the Trustee, furnish each of the
Committee and the Trustee with such reasonable information as each of the
Committee or the Trustee shall deem necessary or appropriate to carry out the
intent and purposes of the Trust, and each of the Committee and the Trustee
shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the information received from the
Corporation, unless, in the case of the Trustee, the Committee has informed the
Trustee in writing not to rely on such information.  
 
Section
2.3.                                 Irrevocable; Not Subject to
Creditor Claims.  Subject to the provisions of Section 9.2
hereof, this Trust shall be irrevocable.  In addition, the Fund shall
not be subject to the claims of the creditors of the Corporation in a bankruptcy
or other insolvency proceeding under Federal or state law, but shall be
maintained for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to Participants under
the Plan who are participants in the $uper $aver
Plus Plan.  The right to receive benefits under the Plan
through this Agreement may not be anticipated, alienated, sold, transferred,
assigned, pledged, encumbered or subjected to any charge or legal process, and
the non-alienation provisions of Sections 8.1 and 8.2 of the Plan are hereby
incorporated in the entirety by this reference.  
 
Section
2.4.                                 Secured Interest; Separate
Account.  Each Participant shall have a secured interest in the
Account maintained in the Fund with respect to the benefits payable under the
Plan.  Each Participant’s Account will be maintained as a “separate
account” within the meaning of section 404(a)(5) of the Code.  The
Corporation agrees that during the existence of the Trust, the Corporation shall
not permit or cause, or amend this Agreement to permit or cause, the Fund, or
any part thereof, to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the payment
of benefits under the Plan for Participants and their
Beneficiaries.  
 
ARTICLE
III                                
 
ACCOUNTS
 
Section
3.1.                                 Fund and
Accounts.
 
(a)           The
Fund under this Trust shall consist of such sums of money or other property (and
the earnings thereon) as shall from time to time be paid or delivered to the
Trustee and held by it pursuant to the terms of this
Agreement.  
 
(b)           Contributions
to the Trust with respect to the benefits of Participants shall be credited to
Accounts as provided in Section 3.4.  At the time the Corporation
makes an initial contribution to the Trust with respect to the benefits of a
Participant, it shall notify the Trustee of such fact and an Account shall be
established by the Trustee under the Fund.  The Corporation shall
provide the Trustee with such information or reports as are necessary to credit
contributions to the Account maintained with respect to each Participant in
accordance with Section 4.3 hereof.
 
Section
3.2.                                 Written Certifications
Provided by Corporation to the Trustee.  Subject to this
Section 3.2, the Trustee shall have responsibility for the maintenance of
Account records, including, without limitation, the responsibility for making
determinations regarding the adjustment of such Accounts under Section 3.4 hereof.  The Corporation shall
provide the Trustee from time to time, but not less frequently than annually,
with written certifications pursuant to Section 4.3 hereof concerning the amount
and form of benefits payable to each Participant under the Plan and the time or
times when such benefits shall become payable.  Each such
certification shall state that it is made in accordance with the terms of the
Plan,
is binding on the Trustee, and may not be modified, amended or rescinded in any
manner whatsoever, except by a subsequent certification which complies with the
requirements of Section 4.3
hereof.  The Trustee shall not be bound by, and shall ignore,
any such certification which does not comply with the requirements of Section
4.3 hereof.  The Trustee shall
make payments to Participants and Beneficiaries strictly in accordance with the
terms of Section 4.4 hereof and shall have no responsibility or duty to evaluate
such certifications or other reports with respect to their validity, accuracy or
completeness or to make any inquiry regarding the data or information contained
therein.  If the Corporation does not provide the Trustee with the
information necessary to establish an Account pursuant to this Section 3.2 and
Section 4.3 herein, the Trustee shall
deposit any contributions for which it has not received information into the
Expense Account, and shall maintain the contributions in the Expense Account until it has received such
information.  
 
Section
3.3.                                 Benefits
Payable.  Any benefits becoming payable to a Participant or
Beneficiary under the Plan shall be paid from the Fund and charged against the
Account maintained with respect to the benefits of such
Participant.  No payment shall be made from the Fund to or with
respect to a Participant to the extent that such payment would exceed the
balance then remaining credited in the Account maintained with respect to such
Participant.
 
Section
3.4.                                 Account
Adjustment.  As of each Valuation Date, and based upon the
results of its valuation of the Fund as of such Valuation Date, the Committee
shall direct the Trustee to adjust Accounts to reflect realized and unrealized
gains, income and losses and chargeable expenses of the Fund on an accrual basis
since the preceding Valuation Date, in accordance with the provisions of this
Section 3.4.  The Account will be adjusted to reflect payment of
taxes paid by the Trust with respect to such contributions.  The
amount creditable to the Account of a Participant as of a Valuation Date
selected by the Committee after payment of any benefits and/or applicable
withholding taxes shall not exceed the Participant’s vested accrued benefit
under the Plan as of such date, as determined by the Committee, in its sole and
absolute discretion.  The allocation of any amounts creditable as
contributions, income, losses and realized or unrealized appreciation to the
Account of the Participant shall be limited so that the balance as of such
Valuation Date does not exceed the Participant’s accrued benefit under the
Plan.  Any excess shall rather be allocable to other known or
reasonably anticipated liabilities arising under the Plan and/or the
Trust.  The Trustee shall be under no obligation to question such
allocation adjustment.  
 
Section
3.5.                                 Maintenance of
Accounts.  Once established, an Account shall be maintained
with respect to the benefits of each Participant until it has been liquidated
through distribution to the Participant, or a Beneficiary thereof.
 
Section
3.6.                                 Taxability of the Trust and
the Participants.  
 
(a)           It
is intended that the Trust not constitute a “grantor trust” under sections 671
through 679 of the Code, and, notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to
the contrary, the Corporation, as the grantor of the Trust, shall not possess
any power under this Agreement that would cause the Trust to constitute a
“grantor trust.”  It is intended that the Trust constitute a taxable
entity under sections 641 et.
seq. of the Code.  Accordingly, the Trustee acknowledges and
agrees that the Corporation is not the owner of the Trust for Federal income tax
purposes.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the
contrary, none of the powers granted to the Trustee shall be construed to enable
the Corporation, the Trustee or anyone else, to buy, exchange or otherwise deal
with the Fund for less than adequate and full consideration in money or money’s
worth, or to enable the Corporation, the Trustee or any entity in which the
Corporation, the Trustee, or both, have a substantial interest, to borrow from
the Fund, directly or indirectly, without adequate interest or security; no one
but the Trustee (or the Investment Manager) may vote or direct the vote of any
corporate shares or other securities of the Trust, or control the Trust’s
investments or reinvestments by substituting other property of equal value; the
Trustee is not required to surrender Trust assets upon being tendered substitute
assets, regardless of the relative values of the assets involved.
 
(b)           The
Trust is a funded trust and, as such, it is intended that each Participant in
respect of whom an Account is maintained be taxed in accordance with section
402(b) of the Code.  Consequently, contributions to the Trust by the
Corporation shall be taxable to the Participants in accordance with section
402(b)(1) of the Code.  (The Corporation shall take a deduction for
the amount of such contributions, for United States Federal income tax purposes,
in accordance with section 404(a)(5) of the Code.)  Except as is
necessary to satisfy any Trust obligation, if any, to withhold taxes and to pay
over such withheld amounts to the appropriate taxing authorities, the Trust
shall not have any obligation or liability for the payment of any income,
estate, gift or employment taxes payable by a Participant or Beneficiary, or the
estate of a Participant or Beneficiary, with respect to benefits payable under
the Plan.  The Trustee shall
have the responsibility to file any tax returns, reports or other information as
may be required by any Federal, state, local or other taxing or governmental
authority with respect to the Trust, its income and distributions and
withholding therefrom.  Pursuant to Internal Revenue Service Revenue
Ruling 2007-48 or successor guidance thereto, the Corporation, if required to
withhold employment taxes at the time of contribution, shall withhold and
transmit such taxes.  The Corporation and the Trustee shall comply as
required by law to achieve proper reporting in connection with tax reporting
requirements.
 
Section
3.7.                                 Accumulation/Distribution of
Trust Income.  All of the income and gain derived from the Fund
shall be accumulated and allocated to the Accounts of the Participants pursuant
to Section 3.4 hereof; provided, however,
that the Committee shall have the right, in its sole and absolute discretion, to
instruct the Trustee in writing to distribute all or a portion of such income
and gain credited to the Participants’ respective Accounts to the
Participants.
 
Section
3.8.                                 Contributions by the
Corporation for Income Taxes.  If the income and gain derived
by the Trust in any taxable year is subject to United States Federal, state or
local income tax (e.g., because the Committee has elected not to distribute such
income and gain to the Participants) the Trustee shall pay such income taxes
from the Fund except to the extent that the Corporation contributes to the Trust
an amount to enable the Trustee to pay such income taxes.  To the
extent such taxes are paid from the Fund, the Accounts shall be reduced on a pro
rata basis, subject to Section 3.4.  An amount contributed for such
purpose shall be allocated to each respective applicable Account and the payment
shall be charged against such applicable Account.
 
ARTICLE
IV                                
 
CONTRIBUTIONS,
CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
 
Section
4.1.                                 Contributions to the
Trust.  The Corporation may make such contributions to the Trust as it
shall determine in its sole and absolute discretion, are necessary to provide
benefits to the Participants under the Plan and for the Trust to pay any income
taxes due on its income and gain (as provided in Section 3.8 hereof).  Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained herein, no person, including, without limitation, the
Trustee, the Actuary, any Participant or former Participant, or any Beneficiary
thereof, shall have the right to require the Corporation to make any
contribution to the Trust or to question the accuracy or correctness of any
amounts so contributed.
 
Section
4.2.                                 Provision of Benefits is
Binding Obligation of Corporation.  Except to the extent that
benefits to which a Participant, or the Beneficiary thereof, is entitled under
the Plan are actually paid from the Fund, nothing contained in this Agreement
shall relieve the Corporation of its obligations under the Plan to or with respect to such
Participant.
 
Section
4.3.                                 Provision of Reports and
Written Certifications by the Corporation to the Trustee.  The
Corporation shall maintain, and furnish the Trustee with, such reports,
documents, and information as shall be required by the Trustee to carry out its
obligations under this Agreement, including, without limitation, written reports
setting forth the identity of Participants with respect to whose benefits
contributions are made to the Trust and the amount of such contributions, and
the written certifications regarding Participants’ benefits described
below.  At or about the time an Account is established with respect to
the benefits of a Participant, the Corporation shall furnish the Trustee with a
written certification which includes the amount of the Participant’s benefits,
the time or times as of which such benefits shall become payable, the present
value of such benefits as of a specific date or dates, any conditions which must
be satisfied in order for the Participant to become entitled to such benefits,
and the identity of the Participant’s Beneficiary and the specific conditions
under which benefits shall become payable to such Beneficiary.  Such
certifications may be revised by the Corporation at any time, and from time to
time, to reflect, among other things, entitlement of the Participant to
increased benefits or an earlier time of payment under the Plan and to reflect
changes in Beneficiary designations by the Participant.  No
certification shall be revised, nor shall the Trustee be bound by or honor any
such revision, to decrease the benefits of a Participant or to impose additional
or more stringent conditions with respect to a Participant’s eligibility for
benefits.  The Trustee shall rely on the most recent reports,
documents, information, and certifications furnished to it by the Corporation
which comply with the preceding sentence.
 
Section
4.4.                                 Distributions to
Participants.  At such time as a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, is entitled to the receipt of benefits from the Plan, he or
she shall be entitled to receive from the Account maintained with respect to
such Participant the amount in cash or property, as the case may be, to which he
or she is entitled under the terms of the Plan taking into account any prior
distributions made to the Participant under the Plan.  The Trustee
also shall make payments from the Fund to each Participant or Beneficiary
entitled thereto under the Plan in accordance with Section 3.7 hereof upon
written direction from the Committee.  All distributions made by the
Trust shall be in accordance with the most recent certification filed with the
Trustee pursuant to and in compliance with Section 4.3 hereof promptly upon receipt of written
direction from the Corporation or upon receipt of evidence submitted by the
Participant satisfactory to the Trustee that the Participant has retired or
otherwise terminated his employment with the Corporation, voluntarily or
otherwise.  The Trustee shall not be required to engage in its own
independent investigation regarding any such payment, but shall provide the
Corporation with written confirmation of the fact and amount of such payment
after it is made.
 
ARTICLE
V
 
ACTUARY
 
Section
5.1.                                 Determination of
Corporation’s Fund Contributions by Actuary.  The Actuary shall
calculate from time to time the amount of the contributions that it estimates
should be made to the Fund by the Corporation for the purpose to accumulate
funds to provide benefits under the Plan; provided, however that, pursuant to
Section 4.1 hereof, the Committee may determine, in its sole and absolute
discretion, whether, and to what extent, the Corporation shall be required to
make contributions to the Fund.  
 
Section
5.2.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Actuary.  The Actuary may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Corporation.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received.  The Actuary may be removed by the
Corporation at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Actuary.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Actuary and the Corporation.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, in no event will any such resignation or removal be effective
until a successor Actuary has been appointed upon such resignation or
removal.  Upon the Corporation’s receipt of notice of such resignation
or removal, the Corporation shall appoint a successor Actuary, by written
instrument, to serve commencing on the effective date of the former Actuary’s
resignation or removal.  If a successor is not appointed by the
Corporation within sixty (60) days after the issuance of notice of the Actuary’s
resignation or removal, the Committee shall appoint the successor Actuary.

 
ARTICLE
VI                                
 
INVESTMENTS
AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
6.1.                                 Fund Held in
Trust.  The Fund shall be held in trust by the
Trustee.  The sole responsibilities, powers and duties of the Trustee
with respect to the Trust and the Fund shall be as set forth in this
Agreement.  The Trustee shall be a directed trustee only, with no
discretionary authority or responsibility, with respect to the Fund except to
the extent that it has discretion within investment guidelines provided to it in
writing by the Committee.  
 
Section
6.2.                                 Types of
Investments.  
 
(a)           Except
as otherwise provided in Section 6.4
hereof, the Trustee shall invest and reinvest the assets of the Trust,
without distinction between principal and income, pursuant to investment
guidelines delivered to it in a manner which has the primary purpose of
preservation of principal and liquidity of the Fund and, secondarily, to the
extent consistent with the goal to preserve principal and liquidity of the Fund,
which maximizes the income of the Fund.  The Trustee is expressly
authorized to invest the Fund, or any portion thereof, in any property, real,
personal or mixed, wherever situated, and whether or not productive of income or
consisting of wasting assets, including, without limitation, common and
preferred stocks, mutual funds, bonds, notes, debentures, securities convertible
into common stock, leaseholds, mortgages (including, without limitation, any
collective or part interest in any bond and mortgage or note and mortgage),
interest-bearing accounts and certificates of deposit, oil, mineral or gas
properties, royalties, interests or rights (including equipment pertaining
thereto), equipment trust certificates, investment trust certificates, savings
bank deposits, and commercial paper, provided that the assets of the Trust shall
at no time be invested in the equity or debt securities, whether secured or
unsecured, of the Corporation, its affiliates or its trades or businesses except
to the extent such security may be held in a mutual fund.  Pending
such investment and reinvestment, the Trustee may temporarily invest and
reinvest the funds, at its discretion, in any marketable short and medium term
fixed-income securities, United States Treasury Bills, other short and medium
term government obligations, commercial paper, other money market instruments
and part interests in any one or more of the foregoing or money market mutual
funds, or may maintain cash balances consistent with the liquidity needs of the
Trust as determined by the Trustee.
 
(b)           The
Trustee shall, at the direction of the Committee, purchase life insurance and/or
annuity contracts providing flexible funding or similar vehicles or for the
investment of assets in separate accounts invested in any securities and other
property including real estate, regardless of whether or not the insurance
carrier shall have assumed any contractual or other liability as to the benefits
to be provided thereunder, the value thereof, or the return
therefrom.  Such life insurance and/or annuity contracts shall be
considered investments of the Trust and all rights, privileges, options and
elections contained therein shall vest in the Trustee but shall be exercised,
assigned or otherwise disposed of as directed by the Committee.  The
insurance carrier under any such contract shall have full responsibility for the
management and control of the assets held thereunder.
 
Section
6.3.                                 Powers and Authority of
Trustee.  In addition to the powers elsewhere conferred upon
the Trustee under this Agreement and subject to Sections 6.2 and 6.4 hereof, the Trustee shall be authorized and
empowered, in its discretion, to exercise any and all of the following rights,
powers and privileges with respect to any cash, securities or other properties
held by the Trustee in trust hereunder, acting in accordance with written
instructions received from the Committee:
 
(a)           To
sell any such property at such time and upon such terms and conditions as the
Trustee deems appropriate.  Such sales may be public or private, for
cash or credit, and may be made without notice or advertisement of any
kind.
 
(b)           To
exchange, mortgage, pledge or lease any such property and to convey, transfer or
dispose of any such property on such terms and conditions as the Trustee deems
appropriate.
 
(c)           To
grant options for the sale, transfer, exchange or disposal of any such
property.
 
(d)           To
exercise all voting rights pertaining to any securities; to consent to or
request any action on the part of the issuer of any such securities; and to give
general or special proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of
substitution.
 
(e)           To
consent to or participate in amalgamations, reorganizations, recapitalizations,
consolidations, mergers, liquidations or similar transactions with respect to
any securities, and to accept and to hold any other securities issued in
connection therewith.
 
(f)           To
exercise any subscription rights or conversion privileges with respect to any
securities held in the Fund.
 
(g)           To
collect and receive any and all money and other property of whatsoever kind or
nature due or owing or belonging to the Fund and to give full discharge and
acquittance therefor; and to extend the time of payment of any obligation at any
time owing to the Fund, as long as such extension is for a reasonable period and
continues to bear reasonable interest.
 
(h)           To
cause any securities or other property to be registered in, or transferred to,
the individual name of the Trustee or in the name of one or more of its
nominees, or one or more nominees of any system for the centralized handling of
securities, but the books and records of the Trust shall at all times show that
all such investments are a part of the Fund.
 
(i)           To
organize under the laws of any state a corporation for the purpose of acquiring
and holding title to any property which the Trustee is authorized to acquire
under this Agreement and to exercise with respect thereto any or all of the
powers set forth in this  Agreement.
 
(j)           To
manage, operate, repair, improve, develop, preserve, mortgage or lease for any
period any real property or any oil, mineral or gas properties, royalties,
interest or rights held by it directly or through any corporation, either alone
or by joining with others, using other Trust assets for any of such purposes; to
modify, extend, renew, waive or otherwise adjust any or all of the provisions of
any such mortgage or lease; and to make provision for amortization of the
investment in or depreciation of the value of such property.
 
(k)           To
settle, compromise, or submit to arbitration any claims, debts or damages due or
owing to or from the Trust; to commence or defend suits or legal proceedings
whenever, in its judgment, any interest of the Trust requires it; and to
represent the Trust in all suits or legal proceedings in any court of law or
equity or before any other body or tribunal, insofar as such suits or
proceedings relate to any property forming part of the Fund or to the
administration of the Fund.
 
(l)           To
borrow money from itself or others for the purposes of the Trust.
 
(m)           To
purchase, hold and sell interests or units of participation in any collective or
common trust fund established by the Trustee, including any such funds which may
be established in the future.
 
(n)           Generally
to do all acts, whether or not expressly authorized which the Trustee deems
necessary or appropriate to perform its duties and discharge its
responsibilities under this Agreement.
 
(o)           To
retain the services of outside legal counsel and/or other professionals as may
be necessary to assist it in connection with the administration of the Trust
and/or management or conservation of the Fund’s assets, including defending the
Trust from attack, claims or litigation regarding its assets.
 
(p)           To
pay expenses of the Trust that are incurred in connection with the
administration of the Trust and/or the management of the Fund’s
assets.
 
Section
6.4.                                 Investment of Fund by
Investment Manager.  
 
(a)           Appointment of Investment
Manager.  The Committee may appoint one or more Investment
Managers, which may be the Trustee or an affiliate of the Trustee, to manage
(including the power to acquire and dispose of) all or any of the assets of the
Fund.  In the event of such appointment, the Committee shall establish
the portion of the assets of the Fund that shall be subject to the management of
any such Investment Manager and shall notify the Trustee in writing of such
appointment and the assets subject to the Investment Manager’s
discretion.  If there shall be more than one Investment Manager, the
portion of the Fund to be invested by each such Investment Manager shall be held
in a separate account and the powers and authority of each such Investment
Manager shall be divided as set forth in the instruments appointing such
Investment Managers.  To the maximum extent permitted by law, the
Trustee shall be protected in assuming that the appointment of an Investment
Manager remains in effect until it is otherwise notified by the Committee in
writing.  With respect to the assets over which an Investment Manager
has investment responsibility, the Investment Manager shall possess all of the
investment powers and responsibilities granted to the Committee hereunder, and
the Trustee shall invest and reinvest such assets pursuant to the direction of
the Investment Manager.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent
so provided in the document by which the Investment Manager accepts its
appointment, the Committee may:
 
(i)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments shall be
made or liquidated;
 
(ii)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments not be
made; and
 
(iii)           Require
that the Investment Manager obtain approval from the Committee prior to
acquiring or disposing of all or any assets under its control.
 
(b)           Successor Investment
Manager.  The Committee may terminate its appointment of an
Investment Manager at any time and shall in writing notify the Trustee of such
termination, and may thereafter appoint a successor Investment Manager in the
same manner as provided in this Section 6.4.  Such successor
Investment Manager shall thereafter, until its appointment shall be terminated,
be deemed to be an Investment Manager for all purposes of this
Agreement.  In the event that a Committee does not exist, the Trustee
shall terminate any Investment Manager that is not an affiliate of the Trustee
and shall immediately appoint its affiliate, Evergreen Investments, as
Investment Manager.
 
(c)           Effect of Appointment of
Investment Manager on Trustee.  So long as an Investment
Manager (other than the Trustee or one of its affiliates) is serving as such,
the Trustee shall be under no duty or obligation to review the assets comprising
any portion of the Fund managed by the Investment Manager, to make any
recommendations with respect to the investment or reinvestment thereof, or to
determine whether any direction received from any Investment Manager is proper
or within the terms of this Agreement or to monitor the activities of any
Investment Manager.  The Trustee shall have no liability or
responsibility to the Corporation, the Committee or any persons claiming any
interest in the Fund for acting without question on the direction of, or for
failing to act in the absence of any direction from, the Committee or any
Investment Manager unless the Trustee participated knowingly in, or knowingly
undertook to conceal, an act or omission of the Committee or of any Investment
Manager constituting a breach of its duties hereunder, knowing such act or
omission was a breach of such duties; provided, however, that the Trustee shall
not be deemed to have “participated” in a breach (i) by the Committee or to have
“knowledge” of any such breach as a result of accepting any property contributed
to the Trust in the Corporation’s discretion or retaining such property as an
investment for the Fund at the Committee’s direction; and (ii) by the Committee
or any Investment Manager for the purposes of this undertaking solely as a
result of the performance by the Trustee or its officers, employees or agents of
any custodial, reporting, recording, and bookkeeping functions with respect to
any assets of the Fund managed by any Investment Manager, or with respect to
which the Trustee has received directions from the Committee, or solely as a
result of settling purchase and sale transactions entered into or directed by
any Investment Manager or the Committee, or to have “knowledge” of any such
breach solely as a result of the information received by the Trustee or its
officers, employees or agents in the normal course in performing such functions,
or settling such transactions.  If the Trustee has actual knowledge of
a breach committed by an Investment Manager, it shall promptly notify the
Committee in writing thereof, and the Trustee, except as required by applicable
law, shall thereafter have no responsibility to remedy such breach.
 
Section
6.5.                                 Making Benefit
Payments.  Upon receipt of direction from the Corporation
consistent with certifications theretofore delivered to the Trustee pursuant to
Section 4.3, the Trustee shall promptly make benefit payments.  All
returns, records and forms required to be filed with the Federal, state and
local taxing authorities or delivered to each Participant and Beneficiary shall
be filed by the Corporation and/or Trustee in accordance with applicable law for
periods commencing with the Effective Date.  Except as provided in
this Agreement, all income taxes required to be paid by each Participant (and
any returns, records and forms required with respect to such taxes) shall be the
sole responsibility of such Participant.  
 
Section
6.6.                                 Deposit of Contributions by
Trustee.  The Trustee shall accept for deposit in the Fund all
contributions in cash made by the Corporation under this Agreement and shall
promptly acknowledge receipt of same.  The Trustee shall have no
responsibility to determine or to question the accuracy or correctness of any
amounts so contributed.
 
Section
6.7.                                 Dealings with the
Trustee.  Persons dealing with the Trustee shall be under no
obligation to see to the proper application of any money paid or property
delivered to the Trustee or to inquire into the Trustee’s authority as to any
transaction.
 
Section
6.8.                                 Use of Fund Assets to Pay
Trust Expenses.  If the amount in the Expense Account is
insufficient to pay the expenses of the Trust, the Trustee may, in its
discretion or at the discretion of the Committee, use assets of the Fund (other
than those deposited in the Expense Account) to pay the expenses of the Trust,
including, without limitation, any (i) legal or other professional expenses
incurred in connection with the management, protection or conservation of the
assets of the Fund and (ii) insurance premiums that may be incurred with respect
to any fiduciary liability insurance that may be obtained by the Trust to cover
potential claims for indemnification that may be made by members of the
Committee pursuant to Section 10.3 of this
Agreement.
 
ARTICLE
VII                                
 
DUTIES
OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
7.1.                                 General Duties of the
Trustee.  
 
(a)           It
shall be the duty of the Trustee to protect and conserve all property received
by it hereunder which, together with the income and gains therefrom and
additions thereto, shall constitute the Fund.  The Trustee shall
manage, invest and reinvest the Fund, collect the income thereof, and make
payments therefrom, all as herein provided.
 
(b)           The
Trustee shall discharge its duties with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence
under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like
capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of a like character and with like aims, and, in accordance with the
documents and instruments governing the Plan and the Trust.
 
Section
7.2.                                 Valuation of
Fund.  The Trustee shall value the Fund as of each Valuation
Date at current fair market value and shall report the results of such valuation
to the Committee.  The Trustee shall value the assets of the Trust at
market and on such other basis or bases (including, without limitation, cost) as
the Committee shall reasonably request.  The market value of the
assets shall be equal to the market value of the securities and other assets in
the Fund, plus cash, interest, dividends and other sums received and accrued but
not yet invested.  The market value of the securities and other assets
in the Fund shall be based on such market quotations and other information as
are available to the Trustee and as may in the Trustee’s discretion be
appropriate.
 
Section
7.3.                                 Reports and
Records.  The Trustee shall:
 
(a)           Keep
accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and
other transactions in the Fund as it shall deem necessary and proper with
respect to its administration of the Trust, and permit inspection of such
accounts, records and assets of the Trust by any duly authorized representative
of the Corporation, the members of the Committee or the Participants during
regular business hours.
 
(b)           Within
sixty (60) days (or such shorter period of time as the Corporation shall
reasonably request) following the close of the accounting year, and at such
other intervals as are mutually agreed to by the Trustee, the Corporation and
the Committee, the Trustee shall file with the Corporation, the Committee and,
unless the Corporation otherwise directs in writing, the Participants a written
account with respect to the transactions effected by the Trustee during such
accounting year or other period.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall file written objections, if any, with respect to the propriety of the
Trustee’s acts and transactions shown in such account within a period of ninety
(90) days from the date of filing such annual or other account.  If
within ninety (90) days after the receipt of the account or any amended account
the Corporation or the Committee has not signed and returned a counterpart to
the Trustee, nor filed with the Trustee notice of any objection to any act or
transaction of the Trustee, the account or amended account shall become an
account settled as between the Trustee and the Corporation and/or the
Committee.  If any objection has been filed, and if the Corporation
and/or the Committee are satisfied that it should be withdrawn or if the account
is adjusted to their satisfaction, the Corporation and/or the Committee shall in
writing filed with the Trustee signify their approval of the account, and the
account shall become an account settled as between the Trustee and the
Corporation and the Committee.
 
When an
account becomes an account settled, such account shall be finally settled, and
the Trustee shall be completely discharged and released, as if such account had
been settled and allowed by a judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction in an action or proceeding in which the Trustee, the Corporation,
the Committee and all persons having or claiming to have any interest in the
Fund or under the Plan were parties.
 
The
Trustee, the Corporation or the Committee shall have the right to apply at any
time to a court of competent jurisdiction for judicial settlement of any account
of the Trustee not previously settled as hereinabove provided.  In any
such action or proceeding it shall be necessary to join as parties only the
Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee (although the Trustee may also join
other parties as it deems appropriate), and any judgment or decree entered
therein shall be conclusive.
 
(c)           Make
such periodic reports to the Corporation and the Committee as may be mutually
agreed to by the Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee, as
applicable.
 
(d)           Prepare
and timely file such tax returns and such other reports and documents, together
with supporting data and schedules, as may be required of the Trustee by law,
with any taxing authority or any other government authority, whether local,
state or Federal.
 
(e)           Provide
the Participants with copies of all such reports, returns, filing and documents
required by law, and cooperate with the Corporation in the filing of tax reports
and returns required to be filed by applicable law.
 
Section
7.4.                                 No Duty to Advance Funds or
to Administer the Plan.  The
Trustee shall have no obligation to advance its own funds for the purpose of
fulfilling its responsibilities under this Agreement, and its obligation to
incur expenses shall at all times be limited to amounts in the Trust available
to be applied toward such expenses.  The Trustee shall not be
responsible in any respect for administering the Plan. 
 
Section
7.5.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Trustee.  The Trustee may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Committee.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received, or such earlier date as may be agreed to by the
Trustee and the Committee.  In addition, the Trustee may be removed by
the Committee at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Trustee.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Trustee and the Committee.  
 
Upon the
Committee’s receipt of notice of such resignation or removal, the Committee
shall appoint a successor Trustee by written instrument, to serve commencing on
the effective date of the former Trustee’s resignation or removal.  If
a successor is not appointed by the Committee within sixty (60) days after the
issuance of notice of the Trustee’s resignation or removal, the Trustee may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of his or its
successor.  All expenses of the Trustee in connection with the
proceeding shall be allowed as an administration expense of the
Trust.  The Trustee shall continue to serve until a successor accepts
the Trust and receives delivery of the Fund.  The appointment of a
successor Trustee shall be effective when accepted in writing by the new
Trustee.  Upon the successor Trustee’s acceptance of appointment and
after the final account of the former Trustee has been settled, the former
Trustee shall transfer and deliver the Fund to such successor.  The
former Trustee shall exercise any instrument necessary or reasonably required by
the Committee or the successor Trustee to evidence the
transfer.  Moreover, the former Trustee shall deliver to the successor
Trustee the originals of all reports, records, documents, and other written
information in its possession regarding the Plan, the Fund, and the Participants and
shall deliver copies thereof to the Committee and to a person designated by a
majority of the persons who are Participants (or the Beneficiary of a deceased
Participant) on the date of such resignation or removal, and thereupon shall be
entitled to all unpaid compensation, fees and reimbursements to which it is
entitled under this Agreement and shall be relieved of all responsibilities and
duties under this Agreement.
 
All of
the provisions set forth herein with respect to the Trustee shall relate to each
successor with the same force and effect as if such successor had been
originally named as a Trustee hereunder.  Any successor Trustee shall
have the same powers, rights and duties as its predecessor and shall have the
same title to the Fund as its predecessor.
 
The
successor Trustee need not examine the records and accounts of any prior
Trustee.  The successor Trustee shall not be responsible for, and the
Corporation shall indemnify and defend the successor Trustee from, any claim or
liability resulting from any action or inaction of any prior Trustee or from any
other past event, or any condition existing at the time it becomes successor
Trustee.
 
ARTICLE
VIII                                
 
COMPENSATION,
IMMUNITIES
 
 AND
INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
8.1.                                 Trustee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Trustee shall be entitled to such compensation
and fees for its services under this Agreement as shall be agreed upon from time
to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the Corporation shall
reimburse the Trustee for any expenses incurred by it, including, but not
limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the Trustee, and reasonable
fees for legal services rendered to the Trustee (whether or not rendered in
connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding).  Such
compensation, fees and reimbursement shall be paid to the Trustee pursuant to
the terms set forth at Section 8.2 of this
Agreement.  The Trustee’s entitlement to compensation, fees or
reimbursement hereunder shall not be affected by the resignation or removal of
the Trustee or the termination of the Trust.
 
Section
8.2.                                 Expense
Account.  The Corporation may from time to time make
contributions to the Fund to be held in an Expense Account and to be utilized to
pay the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and
other expenses of the Trust.  To the extent that there are monies in
the Expense Account, the Trustee shall utilize such Expense Account for payment
of the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee, for
payment of the indemnities referred to in Sections 8.4 and 10.3 hereof, and for other expenses of the Trust,
and, in the absence of sufficient monies, shall seek reimbursement from the
Corporation.  In the event that the Corporation shall fail or refuse
to make such reimbursement within sixty (60) days of demand, the Trustee may
satisfy such obligations out of the other assets of the Fund in such manner as
the Trustee deems to be reasonable in the circumstances, taking into account the
amount of liquid assets, the anticipated needs to make distributions to
Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof), and such other factors as the
Trustee deems relevant.  If the Trustee satisfies any obligations of
the Corporation to pay fees and expenses from other Fund assets, the Corporation
shall immediately upon demand by the Trustee deposit into the Trust an amount of
cash equal to the amount paid from such Fund
assets if, at that time, the Trustee could not replace such assets with a
cash amount equal to the liquidation value of such assets.  If such
funds are not deposited within sixty (60) days of such demand, the Trustee may,
in its sole and absolute discretion, commence legal action against the
Corporation for recovery of the amount paid out of the
Fund.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no amount held
in the Expense Account shall be used for purposes other than paying the
compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other
expenses of the Trust, and shall not be distributed to or for the benefit of the
Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof).
 
Section
8.3.                                 Immunities.  The
Trustee shall have the following privileges and immunities:
 
(a)           The
Corporation and the Committee shall furnish the Trustee with instruments
evidencing individuals designated by the Corporation or the Committee, as the
case may be, who are empowered to give directions, statements or certificates to
the Trustee.  A written direction, statement or certificate to the
Trustee signed by any such individual shall be deemed to be the direction,
statement or certificate of the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may
be, and the Trustee may rely upon such directions, statements or certificates to
the extent not prohibited by law.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall furnish the Trustee from time to time with instruments evidencing the
termination of such designated individuals or the appointment of new such
designated individuals and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely upon such
instruments as evidence of the identity and authority of such designated
individuals and shall not be charged with notice of any change with respect
thereto until the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may be, has
furnished the Trustee with instruments relative to such change.
 
(b)           The
Trustee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Trustee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Trustee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties it may
see fit.  In the event that the Trustee does delegate such ministerial
duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person to whom these
duties have been delegated.  The Trustee shall be reimbursed by the
Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal counsel, agents and
expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section 8.2 hereof.  
 
Section
8.4.                                 Indemnity of the
Trustee.
 
(a)           The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds the Trustee harmless from and against
any and all losses, damages, costs, expenses or liabilities, including
reasonable fees for legal services and other costs of litigation, to which the
Trustee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by, incurred
in connection with, or in any way associated with this Agreement, including any
reasonable discretionary action which the Trustee may take under the Trust,
except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct of the Trustee.  If one or more liabilities shall arise, or
if the Corporation fails to indemnify the Trustee as provided herein, or both,
then the Trustee may engage counsel of the Trustee’s choice, but at the
Corporation’s expense, either to conduct the defense against such liabilities,
or to conduct such actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided
for herein, or to take both such actions.  The Trustee shall notify
the Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Trustee has engaged counsel
of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b)           If
the Trustee shall be entitled to indemnification by the Corporation pursuant to
this Section 8.4, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification
upon demand, the Trustee may apply the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction
of the obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by
the Trustee against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in behalf
of the Trust.
 
Section
8.5.                                 Determination of Interests
in the Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal Proceedings.  The
interest of the Participants (and the Beneficiaries thereof) in the Fund shall
be determined in accordance with the terms of the Plan.  The Trustee shall have no duty to question
any direction given by the Corporation or the Committee to the Trustee,
including any direction advising the Trustee as to such interests under the Plan.  The Corporation and the
Committee shall have authority to enforce this Agreement.  To protect
the Fund from the expenses which might otherwise be incurred, no person other
than the Corporation or the Committee may institute or maintain any action or
proceeding against the Trustee or the Fund, or join in any such action or
proceeding, in the absence of written authorization by the Corporation or the
Committee.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section 8.5, in any
action or proceeding affecting the Fund, the only necessary parties shall be the
Corporation, the Committee and the Trustee, and no other person shall be
entitled to any notice or process.
 
ARTICLE
IX                                
 
AMENDMENT
AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST
 
Section
9.1.                                 Amendment of
Agreement.  By a duly executed, written instrument delivered to
the Trustee and acknowledged in the same form as this Agreement, the Corporation
shall have the right at any time and from time to time to amend this Agreement
in whole or in part, except that: (i) the
duties and responsibilities of the Trustee or the Committee shall not be
increased, and the protections afforded to the Trustee or the Committee shall
not be impaired without the written consent of the Trustee or the Committee, as
the case may be; (ii) the protection afforded with respect to obligations
payable to or on behalf of the Participants hereunder may not be impaired
without the unanimous written consent of the Participants; and (iii) the
Corporation shall not have the power to revoke this Trust or to revest title in
itself to the assets comprising the Fund.  Any such amendment shall be
effective upon (a) delivery of such amendment to the Trustee and the Committee,
together with a certified copy of the resolution of the Board of Directors of
the Corporation or of its Compensation Committee,
as the case may be; and (b) endorsement by each the Trustee and the
Committee on such instrument upon receipt thereof, together with any required
consent or consents thereto.  No such amendment shall adversely affect
any benefits accrued under the Plan
with respect to the Participants.  All instruments amending this
Agreement shall be noted upon or kept attached to the executed original of this
Agreement.  
 
Section
9.2.                                 Termination of
Agreement.  This Agreement may not be terminated until the
liability of the Corporation for the payment of all benefits to all
Participants, and the Beneficiaries thereof, has been satisfied in full or until
such time as no funds remain on deposit in the Fund pursuant to this Agreement;
provided, however, that with the written consent of a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, the Committee may terminate this Agreement at any time with
respect to such consenting Participant or
Beneficiary.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this
Trust shall terminate no later than twenty-one (21) years after the death of the
last survivor of all of the Participants included in the original list of
Participants of this Agreement as constituted prior to this Restated and Amended
Agreement, and those persons now living who have been designated as
Beneficiaries of such Participants in accordance with the terms of the Plan. 
 
ARTICLE
X                                
 
THE
COMMITTEE
 
Section
10.1.                                 Membership and Actions of
the Committee.  
 
(a)           The
Committee shall at all times consist of a minimum of three (3) individuals, all
of whom shall be Participants of the
Plan.  Any member of the Committee may resign upon thirty (30)
days prior written notice to the Corporation.  Moreover, any member of
the Committee may be removed at any time by the Corporation.
 
(b)           In
the event of a vacancy on the Committee, the other member(s) of the Committee
shall appoint a successor.  In the event that there is at any time no
member of the Committee then in office, successor members shall be appointed by
the Corporation.
 
(c)           Any
action by the Committee shall require the written approval of at least a
majority of the members of the Committee.  A Committee member shall
not be liable hereunder for any act taken, or omitted to be taken, in good
faith, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct by such Committee member.
 
(d)           All
of the provisions set forth herein with respect to a member of the Committee
shall relate to each successor with the same force and effect as if such
successor had been originally named as a member of the Committee.
 
(e)           The
Committee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Committee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Committee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties as it
may see fit.  In the event that the Committee does delegate such
ministerial duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person
to whom these duties have been delegated.  The Committee members shall
be reimbursed by the Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal
counsel, agents and expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section
8.2 of this Agreement.
 
Section
10.2.                                 Committee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Committee members shall be entitled to such
compensation and fees for their services under this Agreement as shall be agreed
upon from time to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the
Corporation shall reimburse the Committee members for any expenses incurred by
them, including, but not limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the
Committee members, and reasonable fees for legal services rendered to the
Committee (whether or not rendered in connection with a judicial or
administrative proceeding).  Such compensation, fees and reimbursement
shall be paid to the Committee members pursuant to the terms set forth at
Section 8.2 hereof.  The
Committee members’ entitlement to compensation, fees or reimbursement hereunder
shall not be affected by the resignation or removal of any member or members of
the Committee or the termination of the Trust.
 
Section
10.3.                                 Indemnity of
Committee.  
 
(a)           The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds each member of the Committee harmless
from and against any and all liabilities, including reasonable fees for legal
services and other costs of litigation, to which each such member of the
Committee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by,
incurred in connection with, or in any way associated with this Trust or
Agreement, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or
willful misconduct of such member of the Committee.  If one or more
liabilities shall arise, or if the Corporation fails to indemnify such member of
the Committee as provided herein, or both, then the Committee member may engage
counsel of the Committee member’s choice, but at the Corporation’s expense,
either to conduct the defense against such liabilities, or to conduct such
actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided for herein, or to
take both such actions.  The Committee member shall notify the
Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Committee member has so engaged
counsel of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b)           If
a Committee member shall be entitled to indemnification pursuant to this Section
10.3, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification upon demand,
the Trustee shall satisfy any indemnity to a Committee member pursuant to this
Section 10.3 out of the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction of the
obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by the
Committee member against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in
behalf of the Trust.
 
ARTICLE
XI                                
 
MISCELLANEOUS
 
Section
11.1.                                 Governing
Law.  This Trust is created and accepted in the State of
Delaware.  All questions pertaining to the validity or construction of
this Agreement and the acts and transactions of the parties hereto and their
respective successors shall be determined in accordance with the laws of the
State of Texas, except as to matters governed by Federal law.
 
Section
11.2.                                 No Effect on
Employment.  Nothing contained in this Agreement shall create,
or be construed or interpreted to create, any new or additional obligations on
the part of the Corporation or its affiliates
to retain any person in its employ or interfere in any way with the right
of the Corporation or its affiliates to
discharge any employee.
 
Section
11.3.                                 Successors.  This
Agreement shall be binding upon, and the powers herein granted to the
Corporation and the Trustee, respectively, shall be exercisable by, the
respective successors and assigns of the Corporation and the
Trustee.
 
Section
11.4.                                 Severability.  Should
any provision of this Agreement be determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unlawful or unenforceable, such determination shall not
adversely affect the remaining provisions of this Agreement, unless it shall
make impossible the maintenance or operation of the Trust for its intended
purposes.  To the extent any provision of this Agreement is determined
to be unlawful or unenforceable, this Agreement shall be construed to be carried
out to the fullest extent possible in a lawful and enforceable
manner.
 
Section
11.5.                                 Incorporation of Plan as
Part of Agreement.  The Plan is expressly incorporated herein
and made a part hereof with the same force and effect as if fully set
forth.  The Corporation shall deliver to the Trustee a copy of all
amendments to the Plan hereafter adopted.
 
Section
11.6.                                 Execution in
Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of
counterparts, each of which shall be considered an original and said
counterparts shall constitute but one and the same instrument.
 
Section
11.7.                                 Effect of Divisions and
Captions.  The division of this Agreement into articles,
paragraphs, sections and subsections and the use of captions are solely for
convenience and shall have no legal effect in construing the provisions of this
Agreement.
 
Section
11.8.                                 Gender and
Number.  Whenever the masculine, feminine, or neuter gender is
used inappropriately in this Agreement, this Agreement shall be read as if the
appropriate gender was used, and, unless the context otherwise requires, the
singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
 
Section
11.9.                                 Mistake of
Fact.  A misstatement or other mistake of fact relating to this
Agreement shall be corrected when it becomes known, and the Committee shall make
such adjustment on account thereof as it considers equitable and practicable;
provided that no adjustment under this Section 11.9 shall be made which violates
any provision of section 409A of the Code or any guidance issued
thereunder.  
 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the Corporation, the Trustee and the Committee have entered in
to this Agreement as of NOVEMBER 17, 2008, effective as of the Effective
Date.
 
CORPORATION:
 
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.,
   a
Delaware corporation
 

Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;   By:
                                                                        Kenneth
W. Wimberly, Corporate Secretary


TRUSTEE:
 
WACHOVIA BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION


Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;   By:

                                                                Name:                                                                        

                                                                Title:                                                                        



COMMITTEE:
 

 

Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By:
Gerard J. Arpey



Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By: 
Thomas W. Horton



Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By:
Jeffrey J. Brundage



Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By:
Gary F. Kennedy




EX-10.135
21
ex10135.htm
PROCEDURES FOR DEFERRAL OF BOARD RETAINERS AND FEES, AMENDED

ex10135.htm







AMR
CORPORATION
 

 
PROCEDURES
FOR DEFERRAL OF BOARD RETAINERS AND FEES
 
(AN
AMENDMENT AND RESTATEMENT
 
OF
THE
 
DIRECTORS’
STOCK EQUIVALENT PLAN)
 
ARTICLE
I
 
PURPOSE OF THESE
PROCEDURES
 
Section
1.1 Purpose of these
Procedures.  This document is effective January 1, 2005, except
as otherwise expressly provided.  It is an amendment and restatement
in the entirety of the Directors’ Stock Equivalent Purchase Plan (the “Plan”)
for deferral of retainer and fees by active and former members of the Board of
Directors of AMR Corporation.  The Plan is amended and restated by
these procedures to comply with section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended (defined in Section 2.1 as the “Code”).  These
procedures control the terms and provisions of all elective deferred
compensation agreements deferring retainers and fees remaining outstanding with
such Board members on and after January 1, 2005, and shall govern the terms and
conditions of such elective deferrals.  These procedures shall prevail
over the terms of any separate agreement made pursuant to this Plan which is in
conflict with this Plan, and replace the document entitled “Director’s Stock
Equivalent Purchase Plan”, for deferrals subject to these
procedures.  
 
ARTICLE
II
 
DEFINITIONS
 
Section
2.1 Definitions.  Throughout
this document, certain defined terms are used which are identified by initial
capitalization.  Such terms are defined in this Section 2.1, unless
the context in which such terms are used clearly provides
otherwise.  
 
(a) “AMR”.  AMR
Corporation and any successor corporation thereto.
 
(b) “Beneficiary”.  A
person designated by a Participant who, as permitted under the terms of these
procedures, is or may be entitled to a benefit under these procedures in the
event of the death of the Participant.  If no Beneficiary is
designated, or if the designated Beneficiary is not then living, benefits will
be paid pursuant to Section 9.2.
 
(c) “Board”.  The
Board of Directors of AMR Corporation.
 
(d) “Change in
Control”.  A change in ownership of AMR, or change in effective
control of AMR, or change in ownership of a substantial portion of AMR's assets,
in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor
guidance thereto.  For such purpose the specified percentages in
Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii) or successor guidance
thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective percentage.
 
(e) “Code”.  The
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
(f) “Committee”.  The
Nominating/Corporate Governance Committee of the Board, unless the Board, by
majority vote of its members, elects to serve as the Committee
hereunder.  In the event the Board determines to assume the
administrative duties under these procedures, references hereunder to the
“Committee” shall be references to the Board.
 
(g) “Deferred Compensation
Agreement”.  A written agreement between AMR or American
Airlines, Inc. and a Participant pursuant to which a Participant consents to
participation and makes a deferral of compensation hereunder.
 
(h) “Disabled” or
“Disability”.  “Disabled” or “Disability” shall be determined
pursuant to section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Code.  Determination of
Disability shall be made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor guidance thereto.
 
(i) “Participant”.  A
member or former member of the Board who has electively deferred retainers and
fees under these procedures shall be a Participant and shall remain a
Participant until he or she or his or her Beneficiary has received payment of
all amounts deferred hereunder.  A Participant who is an employee of
AMR or American Airlines, Inc., is not eligible to participate while in employee
status.
 
ARTICLE
III
 
ADMINISTRATION
 
Section
3.1 Administration.  This
Plan shall be administered by the Committee.  The Committee shall have
the power and the duty to take all actions necessary and proper to carry out the
provisions of these procedures.  
 
ARTICLE
IV
 
ELIGIBILITY AND
PARTICIPATION
 
Section
4.1 Eligibility and
Participation.  These procedures as provided in this Plan shall
cover members of the Board who are not employees of AMR or American Airlines,
Inc.  Such individuals shall be entitled to defer retainers and fees
while serving as members of the Board.  In the event such a member
ceases to be a member of the Board of AMR, he or she shall cease to be eligible
to elect any future deferrals hereunder, but participation shall continue until
all deferrals are paid. Any eligible Board member who has made a deferral is a
Participant.  
 
ARTICLE
V
 
DEFERRAL
 
Section
5.1 Deferral.  A
Participant may elect prior to the commencement of each calendar year to defer
payment of all or any part of his or her director fees and retainers for
services to be rendered during the following calendar year according to the
Participant's Deferred Compensation Agreement.  In the year in which
an eligible director is elected or appointed, the eligible director may defer
retainers and fees for such year by signing a Deferred Compensation Agreement,
within thirty (30) days of election or appointment which shall become effective
for fees and retainers payable after the date of execution.  Once
executed, a Deferred Compensation Agreement may not be cancelled or
revoked.  The Participant shall elect the form in which his or her
benefits shall be paid at the time he or she makes his or her deferral election
pursuant to these procedures.  Once made, an election of the time and
form of payment cannot be changed unless (i) made twelve (12) months before the
time of the first payment to be changed, (ii) is not effective for twelve (12)
months, and (iii) must defer the payment at least five (5) years later than the
originally scheduled first payment date, except as otherwise specifically
permitted in applicable Treasury Regulations.  Each Deferred
Compensation Agreement shall constitute a separate payment election for the
compensation deferred under that Deferred Compensation
Agreement.  
 
ARTICLE
VI
 
ACCOUNTING FOR DEFERRED
AMOUNTS
 
Section
6.1 Accounting for Deferred
Amounts.  AMR shall maintain an individual account under the
name of each Participant on whose behalf compensation has been deferred under
these procedures.  Each such account shall be adjusted to reflect the
retainers and fees credited thereto, the additional amounts credited on such
compensation pursuant to Article VII and any payment of such amounts
hereunder.  Each account shall be credited with earnings or values
computed pursuant to Article VII.  
 
Section
6.2 Funding.  AMR
will pay the entire cost of the Plan.  It is the intent of AMR to pay
benefits as they become payable from the general assets of AMR.
 
ARTICLE
VII
 
COMPUTATION OF AMOUNTS
CREDITED TO DEFERRED ACCOUNTS
 
Section
7.1 Deferral of Retainers and
Fees.  A Participant may elect to defer all or a portion of his
or her yearly retainers and fees pursuant to one of two deferral
methods:
 
(a) JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A.
Deferral.  Under this method, amounts deferred will earn
interest (compounded monthly) at the prime rate in effect from time to time at
the JP Morgan Chase Bank N.A., or any successor thereto.
 
(b) Stock Purchase Equivalent
Plan.  Under this method, compensation deferred during any
calendar month is converted on the last business day of each month into stock
equivalent units by dividing the total amount of deferred compensation by the
arithmetic mean of the highest and lowest quoted selling price, regular way, of
the common stock of AMR on the New York Stock Exchange (“Fair Market Value”)
during such month.  At the end of the determined period AMR or
American Airlines, Inc., will pay to the Participant an amount in cash equal to
the number of accumulated stock equivalent units multiplied by the Fair Market
Value of the AMR common stock during the month in which the deferral period
terminates.  The number of stock equivalent units computed as above
will be allocated to the Participant’s account on a cumulative
basis.
 
In the
event of any merger, reorganization, consolidation, recapitalization, stock
dividend, stock split or other change in corporate structure affecting AMR’s
common stock, an adjustment will be made to the number of stock equivalent units
credited to a Participant's account.  The adjustment contemplated by
this paragraph will be similar to adjustments made to stock awards made to
officers of AMR.
 
ARTICLE
VIII
 
VESTING
 
Section
8.1 Vesting.  A
Participant shall at all times have a nonforfeitable right to all amounts
credited to his or her account hereunder.
 
ARTICLE
IX
 
TIME AND METHOD OF
DISTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS
 
Section
9.1 Time and Method of
Distribution of Benefits.  Amounts shall be paid in a single
lump sum after the first to occur of the following events (not later than sixty
days after):
 
(a) the date
of the Participant's Disability;
 
(b) the date
of the Participant's death;
 
(c) the date
of a Change in Control; or
 
(d) the time
of payment elected by the Participant in his or  her Deferred
Compensation Agreement.
 
No
Participant or Beneficiary shall have any right to payment of any amounts
hereunder prior to such event except as provided in this Article IX, and amounts
shall be payable hereunder only in accordance with the terms and provisions of
these procedures.  Payment may not be accelerated by action of AMR or
the Participant, except as provided in Section 10.1.  The Participant
shall elect the time at which his or her deferral for the relevant year shall be
paid when he or she makes his or her deferral election pursuant to Article V of
the Plan.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section
9.1, prior to December 31, 2008, changes to the time and form of payment
accomplished by this amended and restated Plan, and any amendments to individual
Deferred Compensation Agreements which change the time and form of payment shall
be deemed to have made in accordance with Internal Revenue Service Notices
2006-79 and 2007-86.
 
Section
9.2 Death of a
Participant.  In the event that a Participant shall die at any
time prior to complete distribution of all amounts payable to him or her,
payment shall be made within sixty (60) days of the date of the Participant’s
death, in a lump sum to the Beneficiary designated by the
Participant.  In the absence of a designation by a Participant or if
the designated Beneficiary(ies) predecease the Participant, the unpaid amount
shall be paid to the Participant's spouse, and if the spouse is not then living
to the Participant’s estate.  Each Participant shall have the right to
designate the Beneficiary selected in writing.  Beneficiary
designations shall be made only through the Participant's Deferred Compensation
Agreement.
 
Section
9.3 Time of Payment Elected by
Participant.  Payment pursuant to a Deferred Compensation
Agreement for periods of Board service before January 1, 2005, shall be
made in accordance with the payment terms designated by the relevant Deferred
Compensation Agreement, notwithstanding the provisions of this Article
IX.
 
Section
9.4 Payment In The Event Of
Legal Disability.  If a person entitled to any payment shall be
under a legal disability, or in the sole judgment of the Committee shall
otherwise be unable to apply such payment to his or her own interest and
advantage, the Committee, in the exercise of his discretion, may direct such
payment in any one (1) or more of the following ways:
 
(a) Directly
to such person;
 
(b) To his or
her legal guardian or conservator; or
 
(c) To his or
her spouse or to any person charged with his or her support;
 
to be
expended for his or her benefit.  The decision of the Committee shall
in each case be final and binding upon all persons in interest.  Any
such payment shall completely discharge the obligations of the AMR and American
Airlines, Inc. with regard to such payment.
 
Section
9.5 Assignment.  The
right to receive benefits under the Plan may not be anticipated, alienated,
sold, transferred, assigned, pledged, reimbursed or subjected to any change or
legal process.  
 
ARTICLE
X
 
AMENDMENT AND
TERMINATION
 
Section
10.1 Amendment;
Termination.  The Board may terminate or amend this Plan,
provided that no such termination or suspension shall adversely affect a benefit
payable under this Plan with respect to a Participant.  In the event
of termination of this Plan the Committee shall distribute to the Participant in
a lump sum all amounts credited to the Participant’s account.  Such
payment will be made sixty (60) days after the date of
termination.  Any termination of this Plan which permits acceleration
of payment shall be made only in accordance with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or successor guidance hereto.
 
Section
10.2 Construction.  All
questions pertaining to the construction, validity and effect of this Plan shall
be determined in accordance with the laws of the United States and the State of
Texas.
 

 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused this instrument to be executed the
17th
day of November, 2008, effective as of January 1, 2005.
 

AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           Corporate
Secretary
















EX-10.138
22
ex10138.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138.htm









PURCHASE
AGREEMENT NUMBER 3219

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Relating
to Boeing Model 787-923 Aircraft





BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



TABLE OF
CONTENTS


                                                                                                               SA
ARTICLES                                                                                                                     NUMBER


1.              Quantity,
Model and Description

2.              Delivery
Schedule

3.              Price

4.              Payment

5.              Miscellaneous

6.              Confidential
Treatment

TABLE

1.              Aircraft
Information Table – TRENT
1.              Aircraft
Information Table - GENX

EXHIBIT

A.              Aircraft
Configuration

B.              Aircraft
Delivery Requirements and Responsibilities

C.              Defined
Terms

SUPPLEMENTAL
EXHIBITS





AE1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





BFE1.                      Buyer
Furnished Equipment Variables

CS1.                      787
Customer Support Document





EE1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









EE1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









SLP1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







P.A. No.
3219                                                               
i
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



LETTER
AGREEMENTS





3219-01


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




3219-02                                           Special
Terms – Seats and In-Flight Entertainment




3219-04


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




3219-05                                           Spare
Parts Commitments
3219-06                                           Spare
Parts Initial Provisioning
3219-08                                           Open
Configuration Matters

6-1162-AKP-071R1                                           Purchase
Obligations




6-1162-AKP-072R2


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-AKP-073R1                                           Accident Claims and Litigation




6-1162-CLO-1031


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1032


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1039


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-CLO-1043                                           787
Inspection Process




6-1162-CLO-1042


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1045


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1046


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1047


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-CLO-1048                                           Final
Matters
6-1162-CLO-1049                                           CSI
Matters
6-1162-TRW-0664                                           Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights




6-1162-TRW-0665


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0666


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0667


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0668


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-TRW-0670                                           Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft




6-1162-TRW-0671


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0672


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-TRW-0673                                           Confidentiality
6-1162-TRW-0674                                           Business
Considerations





P.A. No.
3219                                                              
ii
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Purchase
Agreement No. 3219

between

The
Boeing Company

and

American
Airlines, Inc.

______________________________

                      This
Purchase Agreement No. 3219 dated as of __________between The Boeing Company
(Boeing) and American
Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to the
purchase and sale of Model 787-923 aircraft together with all tables, exhibits,
supplemental exhibits, letter agreements and other attachments thereto, if any,
(Purchase Agreement)
incorporates and, solely for purposes of the sale
by Boeing and purchase by Customer of Model 787 aircraft, amends the
terms and conditions of the Aircraft General Terms Agreement dated as of October 31, 1997 between the parties, identified
as AGTA-AAL (AGTA).

Article
1.                      Quantity, Model, and
Description.

The
aircraft to be delivered to Customer will be designated as Model 787-923
aircraft (the Aircraft).  Boeing
will manufacture and sell to Customer Aircraft conforming to the configuration
described in Exhibit A in the quantities listed in Table 1 to this Purchase Agreement.

Article
2.                      Delivery
Schedule.

The
Scheduled Delivery Months of the Aircraft are as listed in the attached Table 1.
Exhibit B describes certain requirements and
responsibilities for both Customer and Boeing in order to accomplish the
delivery of the Aircraft.

Article
3.                      Price.

3.1           Aircraft
Basic
Price.  The Aircraft
Basic Price [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]for each Aircraft is
listed in Table 1.





P.A. No.
3219

 



 






 



3.2           The
Advance Payment Base Price. The Advance Payment Base Price for each Aircraft is
listed in Table 1.

3.3           Aircraft and Advance
Payment Price Components.[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

Article
4.                      Payment.

                      4.1           Deposit.                      Boeing
acknowledges receipt of a deposit in the amount shown in Table 1 for each
Aircraft (Deposit).

4.2           Advance
Payments.                                           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

4.3           Advance Payments
Due.                                                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

4.4           Payment of
Balance.                                                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

Article
5.                      Miscellaneous.

5.1           Aircraft Information
Table.  Table 1 contains and consolidates information contained
in Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 with respect to (i) quantity of Aircraft, (ii)
applicable Detail Specification, (iii) Scheduled Delivery Months, (iv) Aircraft
Basic Price, (v) applicable escalation factors, (vi) Advance Payment Base
Prices, and (vii) Advance Payments and their schedules.

5.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.3           BFE
Variables.  Supplemental Exhibit BFE1 to this Purchase
Agreement contains vendor selection dates, on-dock dates and other variables
applicable to the Aircraft pursuant to the BFE Provisions Document. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.4           Customer Support
Variables.  Information, training, support, materials,
data, protections, goods and
services furnished by Boeing in support of introduction of the Aircraft
into Customer's fleet are described in Supplemental Exhibit CS1 (hereinafter
referred to as “Entitlements”). Solely for purposes of the Aircraft, Supplemental Exhibit CS1 supersedes in its
entirety Exhibit B to the AGTA, and, for clarity, all references to Exhibit B to
the AGTA shall be deemed to refer to Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the Purchase
Agreement.
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.5           Engine
Escalation Variables.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.6           Service Life Policy
Component Variables.  Supplemental Exhibit SLP1 to this
Purchase Agreement lists the airframe and landing gear components covered by the
Service Life Policy for the Aircraft (Covered
Components).

5.7           Public
Announcement.  Boeing may
make a public announcement regarding Customer's purchase of the Aircraft only upon prior
written approval of Boeing's press release by Customer. Customer may make such an announcement at its sole
discretion.

5.8           Negotiated Agreement; Entire
Agreement.  This Purchase Agreement including, without
limitation, the provisions of Article 8 of the AGTA relating to indemnification
and insurance, and Article 11 of Part 2 of Exhibit C of the AGTA relating to
DISCLAIMER AND
RELEASE and EXCLUSION OF CONSEQUENTIAL
AND OTHER DAMAGES, has been the subject of discussion and negotiation and
is understood by the parties. The Aircraft Price and other agreements of the
parties stated in this Purchase Agreement were arrived at in consideration of
such provisions. This Purchase Agreement, including the AGTA, contains the
entire agreement between the parties and supersedes all previous proposals,
understandings, commitments or representations whatsoever, oral or written, and
may be changed only in writing signed by authorized representatives of the
parties.

5.9           Defined
Terms. Exhibit C to this Purchase Agreement contains certain defined terms used
in the AGTA or elsewhere in this Purchase Agreement. All capitalized terms used
in this Purchase Agreement but not otherwise defined shall have the meaning set
forth in Exhibit C to this Purchase Agreement or elsewhere in this Purchase
Agreement.

Article
6.                      Confidential
Treatment.                                                      

 
Customer
and Boeing understand and agree that the information
contained herein represents confidential business information and has value
precisely because it is not available generally or to other parties. Customer
and Boeing agree to limit the disclosure of its contents to employees of
Customer and Boeing with a need to know the contents for purposes of helping
Customer and Boeing perform their obligations under the Purchase Agreement and
who understand they are not to disclose its contents to any other person or
entity without the prior written consent of the other party hereto.
 


DATED AS
OF _______________________





AMERICAN
      AIRLINES, INC.
 
 
BY           _______________________
 
ITS           _______________________
 


THE
      BOEING COMPANY
 
 
BY           _______________________
 
ITS           _______________________
 











EX-10.138A
23
ex10138a.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138a.htm




AIRCRAFT
CONFIGURATION

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Exhibit A
to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A. No.
3219                                                                  
A
PA_Exhibit_A   Rev.: 2/22/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


Exhibit A
to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Page
2



AIRCRAFT
CONFIGURATION

Dated
                

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787 AIRCRAFT


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]
 




P.A. No.
3219                                                                  
A
PA_Exhibit_A   Rev.: 2/22/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 





 






EX-10.138B
24
ex10138b.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138b.htm






 



 






 


Exhibit B
to
Purchase
Agreement No. @
Page
1



AIRCRAFT
DELIVERY REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Exhibit B
to Purchase Agreement Number 3219





P.A. No.
3219                                                                  
B
PA_Exhibit_B   Rev.: 05-17-04 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


Exhibit B
to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Page
4




 
AIRCRAFT
DELIVERY REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787-923 AIRCRAFT


Both
Boeing and Customer have certain documentation and approval responsibilities at
various times during the construction cycle of Customer’s Aircraft that are
critical to making the delivery of each Aircraft a positive experience for both
parties.  This Exhibit B documents those responsibilities and
indicates recommended completion deadlines for the actions to be
accomplished.

1.           GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTATION
REQUIREMENTS.

Certain
actions are required to be taken by Customer in advance of the Scheduled
Delivery Month of each Aircraft with respect to obtaining certain government
issued documentation.

1.1           Airworthiness and
Registration Documents.

Not later than [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
prior to delivery of each Aircraft, Customer will notify Boeing of the
registration number to be painted on the side of the Aircraft.  In
addition, and not later than [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
prior to delivery of each Aircraft, Customer will, by letter to the
regulatory authority having jurisdiction, authorize the temporary use of such
registration numbers by Boeing during the pre-delivery testing of the
Aircraft.

Customer
is responsible for furnishing any temporary or permanent registration
certificates required by any Governmental Authority having jurisdiction to be
displayed aboard the Aircraft after delivery.

1.2           Certificate of Sanitary
Construction.

U.S. Registered
Aircraft.  Boeing will obtain from the United States Public
Health Service, a United States Certificate of Sanitary Construction to be
displayed aboard each Aircraft after delivery to Customer.



2.           INSURANCE
CERTIFICATES.

Insurance certificate requirements are
defined in Article 8 of the AGTA.



P.A. No.
3219                                                               
B-
PA_Exhibit_B   Rev.: 05-17-04 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


Exhibit B
to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Page
4



3.           NOTICE OF FLYAWAY
CONFIGURATION.

3.1           Flyaway Configuration
Notice.

Not later
than [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT] prior to delivery of the Aircraft, Customer will
provide to Boeing a configuration letter stating the requested flyaway
configuration of the Aircraft for its ferry flight.  This
configuration letter should include:





 
      


(i)


the
      name of the company which is to furnish fuel for the ferry flight and any
      scheduled post-delivery flight training, the method of payment for such
      fuel, and fuel load for the ferry
flight;









 
      


(ii)


the
      cargo to be loaded and where it is to be stowed on board the Aircraft, the
      address where cargo is to be shipped after flyaway and notification of any
      hazardous materials requiring special
handling;









 
      


(iii)


any
      BFE equipment to be removed prior to flyaway and returned to Boeing BFE
      stores for installation on Customer's subsequent
  Aircraft.





The
information contained in such configuration letter may be changed from time to
time by the mutual consent of Boeing and Customer.

3.2                  Ferry Flight
Information.

Customer
will provide to Boeing at least [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
prior to delivery of each Aircraft:

(i)       a
complete list of names and citizenship of each crew member and non-revenue
passenger who will be aboard the ferry flight; and

(ii)                  a
complete ferry flight itinerary.

4.           DELIVERY ACTIONS BY
BOEING.

4.1           Schedule of
Inspections.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.2           Schedule of Demonstration
Flights.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.3           Schedule for Customer's
Flight Crew.  Boeing will inform Customer of the date that a
flight crew is required for acceptance routines associated with delivery of the
Aircraft.

4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.5           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.6           Delivery Papers, Documents
and Data.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.7           Delegation of
Authority.  Boeing will present a certified copy of a
Resolution of Boeing's Board of Directors, designating and authorizing certain
persons to act on its behalf in connection with delivery of the Aircraft
including the person executing the transfer of title documents.

4.8           Standard Airworthiness
Certificate.  Boeing will provide at delivery of each Aircraft
the Standard Airworthiness Certificate [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

5.           DELIVERY ACTIONS BY
CUSTOMER.

5.1           Aircraft Radio Station
License.  At delivery Customer will provide a copy of its
Aircraft Radio Station License (or a written statement of the location of the
original license) to be placed on board the Aircraft following
delivery.

5.2           Aircraft Flight
Log.                                           At
delivery Customer will provide the Aircraft Flight Log for the
Aircraft.

5.3           Delegation of
Authority.  Customer will present to Boeing at delivery of the
Aircraft an original or certified copy of Customer's Delegation of Authority
designating and authorizing certain persons to act on its behalf in connection
with delivery of the specified Aircraft.




P.A. No.
3219                                                               
B-
PA_Exhibit_B   Rev.: 05-17-04 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 






EX-10.138C
25
ex10138c.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138c.htm






 



 






 


 
Rev. dated 5-5-97




PURCHASE
AGREEMENT DEFINITIONS

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Exhibit C
to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A.
No. 3219                                                              
C
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



PURCHASE
AGREEMENT DEFINITIONS

Dated
 __________ ,
2008

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787-923 AIRCRAFT



I.           Definitions.

The
following terms, when used in capitalized form in this Purchase Agreement,
including the AGTA and any exhibits, schedules, attachments, supplements,
amendments and letter agreements to this Purchase Agreement, have the following
meanings:

“Advance Payments”
means the payments made by Customer in advance of delivery with respect of an
Aircraft pursuant to Section 4.2 of the Purchase Agreement.

“Advance Payment Base
Price” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.6 of the
AGTA.

“Affiliate”, with
respect to a specified Person, means any other Person directly or indirectly
controlling or controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with
such Person. For the purposes of this definition, “control” when used
with respect to any specified Person, means the power to direct the management
and policies of such Person, directly or indirectly, whether through the
ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise, and the terms “controlling” and
“controlled”
have meanings correlative to the foregoing.

“AGTA” has the meaning
set forth in the recital of the Aircraft General Terms
Agreement  dated October 31, 1997 between Boeing and
Customer.

“Aircraft” means any
or all, as the context requires, of  the Boeing Model 787-923 aircraft
described in Table 1 to the Purchase Agreement, together with the Engines and
Parts that are incorporated or installed in or attached to such
aircraft.

“Aircraft Basic Price”
has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.4 of the AGTA.

“Aircraft Software”
has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Aircraft Price” has
the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.7 of the AGTA.

“Airframe Escalation
Adjustment Document” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.5 of the
AGTA.

“Airframe Price” has
the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.1 of the AGTA.

“ATA” has the meaning
set forth in Section 1 to Part 3 of the Customer Support Document.

“Authorized Agent” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Average Direct Hourly Labor
Rate” has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“BFE Provisions
Document” means the Buyer Furnished Equipment Provisions Document
attached to the AGTA as Exhibit A.

“Boeing” has the
meaning set forth in the recital of the AGTA.

“Boeing Product” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Buyer Furnished Equipment”
or “BFE” has the meaning set forth in Section 1.2 of the
AGTA.

“Correct” or
“Correction” has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Corrected Boeing
Product” has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Customer” has the
meaning set forth in the recital of the AGTA.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

“Deposit” means the
deposit made by Customer in respect of an Aircraft pursuant to Section 4.1 of
the Purchase Agreement.

“Detail Specification”
means the Detail Specification identified in Exhibit A to the Purchase
Agreement, as the same is amended from time to time by Boeing and Customer
pursuant to Article 4 of the AGTA.

“Development Changes”
has the meaning set forth in Section 4.2 of the AGTA.

“Direct Labor” has the
meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Direct Materials” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Documents” has the
meaning set forth in AGTA-AAL, within the first paragraph of section 1 of Part 3
of Exhibit B to the Customer Support Document.

           “Engine” means each of
the two engines installed on the Aircraft and identified on Table 1 to the
Purchase Agreement, together with any and all Parts incorporated or installed in
or attached to each such engine.

“Engine Price” has the
meaning set forth in Section 2.1.3 of the AGTA.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

“Engine Supplier”
means the manufacturer of the Engine.

“Escalation
Adjustment” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.5 of the
AGTA.

“Excusable Delay” has
the meaning set forth in Section 7.1 of the AGTA.

“FAA” means the
Federal Aviation Administration of the United States of America and any agency
or instrumentality of the United States government succeeding to its
functions.

“Failed Component” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 to the Product Assurance
Document.

“Failure” has the
meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 to the Product Assurance
Document.

“Federal Aviation
Regulations” means the regulations promulgated by the FAA from time to
time and any official interpretations thereof.

“Field Services” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 2 to the Customer Support
Document.

“Governmental
Authority” means any federal, state, county, local or foreign
governmental entity or municipality or subdivision thereof or any authority,
arbitrator, department, commission, board, bureau, body, agency, court or other
agency or instrumentality thereof.

“Governmental
Regulations” means: (1) the Type Certificate for the Aircraft; (2) any
other certification, license or approval issued or required for the Aircraft by
the FAA or any other Governmental Authority having jurisdiction over Boeing or
the Aircraft; (3) any other law, rule, order or regulation of the United States
Government or any agency or instrumentality thereof, having jurisdiction over
the Aircraft or Boeing; (4) all regulations and official interpretations of the
certification, license, or approval requirements described in (1), (2) and (3)
above; and (5) all airworthiness directives issued by the FAA.

“Interface Problem”
has the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 5 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Manufacturer Change”
has the meaning set forth in Section 3.2.1 of the AGTA.

“Operator Changes” has
the meaning set forth in Section 3.3.1 of the AGTA.

“Optional Features”
means those Parts identified as optional features in the Detail
Specification.

“Optional Features
Prices” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.2 of the
AGTA.

“Parts” means any and
all appliances, parts, instruments, appurtenances, accessories, furnishings, and
other equipment or property of whatever nature incorporated or installed in or
attached to an Aircraft upon delivery or otherwise pursuant to the Purchase
Agreement.

“Performance
Guarantees” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.4 of the
AGTA.

“Person” means an
individual, partnership, corporation, business trust, joint stock company,
trust, unincorporated association, joint venture, Governmental Authority or
other entity of whatever nature.

“Policy” has the
meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Product Assurance
Document” means the Product Assurance Document attached to the AGTA as
Exhibit C.

“Proprietary
Information” has the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 5 to the
Customer Support Document.

“Proprietary
Materials” has the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 5 to the
Customer Support Document.

“Purchase Agreement”
means Purchase Agreement No. 3219, of even date herewith, between Boeing and
Customer for the purchase of the Aircraft, including, without limitation, the
AGTA and any exhibits, schedules, attachments, supplements, amendments and
letter agreements to such Purchase Agreement.

“Scheduled Delivery
Month” means, with respect to an Aircraft, the scheduled month and year
of delivery for such Aircraft as set forth in Section 2 of the Purchase
Agreement.

“Seller Furnished Equipment”
or “SFE” means those Parts incorporated or installed in, or attached to,
the Aircraft by Boeing and designated as “seller furnished
equipment.”

“Seller Purchased Equipment”
or “SPE” means those Parts incorporated or installed in, or attached to,
the Aircraft by Boeing and designated as “seller purchased
equipment.”

“SLP Component” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 of Product Assurance
Document.

“Standard Airworthiness
Certificate” means a standard airworthiness certificate for transport
category aircraft applicable to an Aircraft issued by the FAA pursuant to Part
21 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (or any successor
regulations).

“Stipulated Rate” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1.3 of Letter Agreement No.
6-1162-TRW-0670.

“Supplier Product” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Suppliers” has the
meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 4 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Taxes” has the
meaning set forth in Section 2.2 of the AGTA.

“Type Certificate”
means a type certificate for transport category aircraft issued by the FAA
pursuant to Part 21 of the Federal Aviation Regulations or any successor
regulation.
“Warranty Inspections”
has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.


II.           Interpretive
Provisions.

When
reference is made to an article, section, attachment, exhibit, schedule or
supplement of the “AGTA” or a “Purchase Agreement” without further reference to
a particular letter agreement, attachment, exhibit, schedule or supplement
thereto, such reference shall be deemed to be a reference to the main text of
the AGTA or such Purchase Agreement, respectively.



P.A. No. 3219
                                                               
C- 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138D
26
ex10138d.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138d.htm






 



 






 



ESCALATION
ADJUSTMENT


AIRFRAME AND OPTIONAL
FEATURES


between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit AE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A. No.
3219
                                                            
AE1 
PA_Supp_EX_AE1_ECI-W_2006
  Rev.: 2/18/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 




 



 






 




1.           Formula.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



































 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


iii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


iv.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


v.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


vi.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





2.           Values to be Utilized in the
Event of Unavailability.

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]





 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]







P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
AE1- 
PA_Supp_EX_AE1_ECI-W_2006
  Rev.: 2/18/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 




 



 






 






EX-10.138E
27
ex10138e.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138e.htm






 



 






 




BUYER
FURNISHED EQUIPMENT VARIABLES

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit BFE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219





P.A. No.
3219                                                          
BFE1
PA_Supp_Ex_BFE1 Rev.:
4/10/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



BUYER
FURNISHED EQUIPMENT VARIABLES

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787 AIRCRAFT


This
Supplemental Exhibit BFE1 contains vendor selection dates, on-dock dates and
other requirements applicable to the Aircraft.

1.           Supplier
Selection.

Customer will select and notify Boeing
of the suppliers of the following items by the following dates:





[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
 


 
[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
 




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






2.           Certification
Document.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]




3.Import

Customer
will insure that Customer’s BFE suppliers provide sufficient information to
enable Boeing, when acting as Importer of Record for Customer’s BFE, to comply
with all applicable provisions of the U.S. Customs Service.





P.A. No.
3219BFE1-
PA_Supp_Ex_BFE1 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 




4.           Delivery Dates and Other
Information

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

Item                                                              Preliminary On-Dock
Dates






Premium Class (PC)
      Seats


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]











 
      


Lifevests[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





(As
specified in Option Number ____________)






 
      


Galley
      Meal Carts[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
      COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
    TREATMENT]





(As
specified in Option Number ____________)





P.A. No.
3219BFE1-
PA_Supp_Ex_BFE1 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138F
28
ex10138f.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138f.htm






 



 






 



787 CUSTOMER SUPPORT
DOCUMENT

between

THE BOEING
COMPANY

And

AMERICAN AIRLINES,
INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit CS1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219


This document
contains:

Part
1:                 Boeing
Maintenance and Flight Training Programs

Part
2:                 Field
and Engineering Support Services

Part
3:                 Technical
Information and Materials

Part
4:                 Alleviation
or Cessation of Performance





 
      


Part
      5:


Protection
      of Proprietary Information and Proprietary
  Materials








P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1 Rev.: 3/23/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 




787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

Boeing is
pleased to provide to Customer the services and support set forth in this
Supplemental Exhibit CS1 will be provided by Boeing to Customer as part of its
continuing commitment to the global support of Boeing’s aircraft and products
during a period commencing with delivery of the first Aircraft and continuing so
long as at least one Aircraft is regularly operated by Customer in commercial
air transport service.

PART 1:                             BOEING MAINTENANCE AND FLIGHT
TRAINING
PROGRAMS


1.           Boeing Training
Programs.

Boeing will provide maintenance
training, cabin attendant training, and flight training programs to support the
introduction of the Aircraft into service as provided in this Supplemental
Exhibit CS1.

1.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

1.2           In
addition to the training provided in Article 1.1, Boeing will provide to
Customer the following training and services:

1.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

1.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





1.2.3


Additional
      Flight Operations Services:









 
      


a.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT];









 
      


b.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


c.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           Training Schedule and
Curricula.

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Location of
Training.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. Customer shall decide on the location or mix of
locations for training, subject to space being available in the desired courses
at the selected training facility on the dates desired.

3.2           If
requested by Customer, Boeing will conduct the classroom portions of the
maintenance and flight training (except for the Performance Engineer training
courses) at a mutually acceptable alternate training site, subject to the
following conditions:

3.2.1                      Customer
will provide acceptable classroom space, simulators (as necessary for flight
training) and training equipment required to present the courses;

3.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
3.2.3                      Customer
will reimburse Boeing for, or, subject to the terms and conditions mutually
agreed upon prior to Boeing providing the instructors to teach the course,
Customer shall provide round-trip transportation for Boeing’s instructors and
shipping of training Materials, which must be shipped to the alternate training
site.

3.2.4                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].  Boeing will use commercially reasonable
efforts to notify Customer prior to commencement of training of any such fees,
duties, licenses, permits and similar charges of which Boeing has knowledge;
and

3.2.5                      Those
portions of training that require the use of training devices not available at
the alternate site will be conducted at Boeing's facility or at some other
alternate site. Customer will be responsible for additional expenses, if any,
which result from the use of such alternate site.


4.           Additional Terms and
Conditions.

4.1           All
training will reflect an airplane configuration defined by
(i)  Boeing’s standard configuration specification for 787 aircraft,
(ii)  Boeing’s standard configuration specification for the minor
model of 787 aircraft selected by Customer, and (iii) any Optional Features
selected by Customer from Boeing’s standard catalog of Optional Features. Upon
Customer’s request, Boeing may provide training customized to reflect other
elements of Customer’s Aircraft configuration subject to a mutually acceptable
price, schedule, scope of work and other applicable terms and
conditions.

4.2           All
training will be provided in the English language. If translation is required
for the Customer’s personnel, Customer will provide interpreters.

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], Boeing will transport Customer’s personnel between
their local lodgings and Boeing’s training facility.

4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. These foregoing restrictions will not apply to
ferry assistance or revenue service training services (it being agreed that in
conjunction with such services, the number of hours each Boeing flight
instructor works shall be mutually agreed to and shall be in accordance with FAA
rules and regulations).

4.5           Normal Line Maintenance is
defined as line maintenance that Boeing might reasonably be expected to furnish
for flight crew training at Boeing's facility, and will include ground support
and Aircraft storage in the open, but will not include provision of spare parts.
Boeing will provide Normal Line Maintenance services for any Aircraft while the
Aircraft is used for flight crew training at Boeing's facility in accordance
with the Boeing Maintenance Plan (Boeing document D6-82076) and the Repair
Station Operation and Inspection Manual (Boeing document D6-25470). Customer
will provide such services if flight crew training is conducted elsewhere.
Regardless of the location of such training, Customer will be responsible for
providing all maintenance items (other than those included in Normal Line
Maintenance) required during the training, including, but not limited to, fuel,
oil, landing fees and spare parts.

4.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.7           If
the flight training is based at Boeing's facility, several airports in the
surrounding area may be used, at Boeing’s option. Unless otherwise agreed in the
flight training planning conference, it will be Customer's responsibility to
make arrangements for the use of such airports.

4.8           If
Boeing agrees to make arrangements on behalf of Customer for the use of airports
for flight training, Boeing will pay on Customer's behalf any landing fees
charged by any airport used in conjunction with the flight training. At least
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT] before flight training, Customer will
provide Boeing an open purchase order against which Boeing will invoice Customer
for any landing fees Boeing paid on Customer's behalf. The invoice will be
submitted to Customer [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], when all
landing fee charges have been received and verified. Customer will pay the
invoiced amount to Boeing [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.9           If
requested by Boeing, in order to provide the flight training or ferry flight
assistance, Customer will make available to Boeing an Aircraft after delivery to
familiarize Boeing instructor or ferry flight crew personnel with such Aircraft.
If flight of the Aircraft is required for any Boeing instructor or ferry flight
crew member to maintain an FAA license for flight proficiency or landing
currency, Boeing will be responsible for the costs of fuel, oil, landing fees
and spare parts attributable to that portion of the flight.




P.A. No.
3219                                                           
CS1                                                                     Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
1 -




 



 






 



787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART 2:                      FIELD
AND ENGINEERING SUPPORT SERVICES


1.           Field Service
Representation.

Boeing will furnish field service
representation to advise Customer with respect to the maintenance and operation
of the Aircraft (Field Service
Representatives).

1.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.2           When
a Field Service Representative is positioned at Customer’s facility, Customer
will provide, at no charge to Boeing, suitable furnished office space and office
equipment, including internet capability for electronic access of data, at the
location where Boeing is providing Field Service Representatives. As required,
Customer will assist each Field Service Representative with visas, work permits,
customs, mail handling, identification passes and formal introduction to local
airport authorities.

1.3           Boeing’s
Field Service Representatives are assigned to various airports and other
locations around the world. Whenever Customer's Aircraft are operating through
any such airport, the services of Boeing's Field Service Representatives are
available to Customer.

1.4           Boeing
may from time to time, with Customer’s agreement, provide additional support
services in the form of Boeing personnel visiting Customer’s facilities to work
with Customer’s personnel in an advisory capacity.

2.           Engineering Support
Services.

2.1           Boeing
will, if requested by Customer, provide technical advisory assistance from the
Seattle area or at a base designated by Customer as appropriate for any Aircraft
or Boeing Product (as defined in Part 1 of Exhibit C of the AGTA). Technical
advisory assistance, provided, will include:

2.1.1                      Analysis
of the information provided by Customer to determine the probable nature and
cause of operational problems and suggestion of possible solutions;

2.1.2                      Analysis
of the information provided by Customer to determine the nature and cause of
unsatisfactory schedule reliability and the suggestion of possible
solutions;

2.1.3                      Analysis
of the information provided by Customer to determine the nature and cause of
unsatisfactory maintenance costs and the suggestion of possible
solutions;

2.1.4                      Analysis
and commentary on Customer's engineering releases relating to structural repairs
not covered by Boeing's Structural Repair Manual including those repairs
requiring advanced composite structure design;

2.1.5                      Analysis
and commentary on Customer's engineering proposals for changes in, or
replacement of, systems, parts, accessories or equipment manufactured to
Boeing's detailed design. Boeing will not analyze or comment on any major
structural change unless Customer's request for such analysis and comment
includes complete detailed drawings, substantiating information (including any
information required by applicable government agencies), all stress or other
appropriate analyses, and a specific statement from Customer of the substance of
the review and the response requested;

2.1.6                      Evaluation
of Customer's technical facilities, tools and equipment for servicing and
maintaining 787 aircraft, recommendation of changes where necessary and
assistance in the formulation of an initial maintenance plan for the
introduction of the first Aircraft into service;

2.1.7                      Assistance
with the analysis and preparation of performance data to be used in establishing
operating practices and policies for Customer’s operation of
Aircraft;

2.1.8                      Assistance
with interpretation of the minimum equipment list, the definition of the
configuration deviation list and the analysis of individual Aircraft
performance;

2.1.9                      Assistance
with solving operational problems associated with delivery and route-proving
flights;

2.1.10  Information
regarding significant service items relating to Aircraft performance or flight
operations;

2.1.11                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],

2.1.12                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

2.2.1                      Boeing
may rely upon the commitment authority of the Customer's personnel requesting
the work.

2.2.2                      As
title and risk of loss has passed to Customer, the insurance provisions of
Article 8.2 of the AGTA apply.

2.2.3                      The
provisions of the Boeing warranty in Part 2 of Exhibit C of the AGTA
apply.

2.2.4                      Customer
will pay Boeing for requested work not covered by the Boeing warranty, if
any.

2.2.5                      The
DISCLAIMER AND
RELEASE and EXCLUSION OF CONSEQUENTIAL
AND OTHER DAMAGES provisions in Article 11 of Part 2 of Exhibit C of the
AGTA apply.

2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






P.A. No.
3219                                                           
CS1                                                                     Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
2 -




 



 






 



787           CUSTOMER
SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART 3:                      TECHNICAL
INFORMATION AND MATERIALS


1.           General.

Materials are defined as any
and all items that are created by Boeing or a third party, which are provided
directly or indirectly from Boeing and serve primarily to contain, convey or
embody information. Materials may include either tangible embodiments (for
example, documents or drawings), or intangible embodiments (for example,
software and other electronic forms) of information but excludes Aircraft
Software. Aircraft
Software is defined as software that is installed on and used in the
operation of the Aircraft.

Customer Information is defined as that
data provided by Customer to Boeing which falls into one of the following
categories: (i) aircraft operational information (including, but not limited to,
flight hours, departures, schedule reliability, engine hours, number of
aircraft, aircraft registries, landings, and daily utilization and schedule
interruptions for Boeing model aircraft); (ii) summary and detailed shop
findings data; (iii) aircraft readiness log data; (iv) non-conformance reports;
(v) line maintenance data; (vi) airplane message data, (vii) scheduled
maintenance data, and (viii) service bulletin incorporation.

           Upon
execution by Customer of Boeing’s standard form Customer Services General Terms
Agreement and Supplemental Agreement for Electronic Access Boeing will provide
to Customer through electronic access certain Materials to support the
maintenance and operation of the Aircraft. Such Materials will, if applicable,
be prepared generally in accordance with Air Transport Association of America
(ATA) iSpec 2200, entitled "Information Standards for Aviation Maintenance" not
covered by iSpec 2200 will be provided in a structure suitable for the
Material’s intended use. Materials will be in English and in the units of
measure used by Boeing to manufacture an Aircraft.

2.           Materials Planning
Conferences.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].







3.           Technical Data and
Maintenance Information.

Boeing
will provide technical data and maintenance information equivalent to that
traditionally provided in the following manuals and documents. The format for
this data and information is not yet determined in all cases. Whenever possible,
Boeing will provide such data and information through electronic
access.





 
      


a)


Flight Operations
      Information.








 
      


Airplane
      Flight Manual








 
      


Operations
      Manual and Checklist








 
      


Weight
      and Balance Manual








 
      


Dispatch
      Deviation Procedures Guide and Master Minimum Equipment
    List








 
      


Flight
      Crew Training Manual








 
      


Fault
      Reporting Manual








 
      


Performance
      Engineer's Manual








 
      


Jet
      Transport Performance Methods








 
      


FMC
      Supplemental Data Document








 
      


Operational
      Performance Software








 
      


ETOPS
      Guide Vol. III








 
      


Flight
      Planning and Performance Manual









 
      


b)


Maintenance
      Information.








 
      


Maintenance
      Manual








 
      


Wiring
      Diagram Manual








 
      


Systems
      Schematics Manual








 
      


Structural
      Repair Manual








 
      


Component
      Maintenance Manual








 
      


Standard
      Overhaul Practices Manual








 
      


Standard
      Wiring Practices Manual








 
      


Non-Destructive
      Test Manual








 
      


Service
      Bulletins and Index








 
      


Corrosion
      Prevention Manual








 
      


Fault
      Isolation Manual








 
      


Power
      Plant Buildup Manual (except Rolls
Royce)








 
      


All
      Operators Letters








 
      


Service
      Letters








 
      


Structural
      Item Interim Advisory








 
      


Combined
      Index








 
      


Maintenance
      Tips








 
      


Configuration
      Data Base Generator User Guide








 
      


Production
      Management Data Base








 
      


Baggage/Cargo
      Loading Manual










c)  


Maintenance
      Planning.




Maintenance
Review Board Report




 
      


Maintenance
      Planning Data Document








 
      


Maintenance
      Task Cards and Index








 
      


Maintenance
      Inspection Intervals Report








 
      


ETOPS
      Guide Vol. II








 
      


Configuration
      Maintenance and Procedures for Extended Range
  Operations





d)           Spares
Information.
Illustrated
Parts Catalog
Standards
Books

e)           Airplane & Airport
Information.




 
      


Facilities
      and Equipment Planning Document








 
      


Special
      Tool & Ground Handling Equipment Drawings &
  Index








 
      


Supplementary
      Tooling Documentation








 
      


Illustrated
      Tool and Equipment List/Manual








 
      


Aircraft
      Recovery Document








 
      


Airplane
      Characteristics for Airport Planning
Document








 
      


Airplane
      Rescue and Fire Fighting Document








 
      


Engine
      Ground Handling Document








 
      


ETOPS
      Guide Vol. I





f)           Shop
Maintenance.




 
      


Service
      Bulletins








 
      


Component
      Maintenance Manuals and Index








 
      


Publications
      Index








 
      


Product
      Support Supplier Directory




Supplier
Product Support and Assurance Agreements

g)           Fleet
Statistical Data and Reporting.
Fleet
Message and Fault Data views, charts, and reports

4.           Advance Representative
Materials.

Boeing will select all advance
representative Materials from available sources and whenever possible will
provide them through electronic access. Such advance Materials will be for
advance planning purposes only.

5.           Customized
Materials.

All customized Materials will reflect
the configuration of each Aircraft as delivered.

6.           Revisions.

6.1           The
schedule for updating certain Materials will be identified in the planning
conference. Such updates will reflect changes to Materials developed by
Boeing.

7.           Supplier Technical
Data.

7.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2           The
provisions of this Article will not be applicable to items of BFE.

7.3           Boeing
will furnish to Customer a document identifying the terms and conditions of the
product support agreements between Boeing and its suppliers requiring the
suppliers to fulfill Customer's requirements for information and services in
support of the Aircraft.  Boeing will provide revisions to such
document from time to time.

8.           Buyer Furnished Equipment
Data.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

9.           Customer's Shipping
Address.

From time to time Boeing may furnish
certain Materials or updates to Materials by means other than electronic access.
Customer will specify a single address and Customer shall promptly notify Boeing
of any change to that address. Boeing will pay the reasonable shipping costs of
the Materials. Customer is responsible for any customs clearance charges,
duties, and taxes.



P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1 Rev.: 3/23/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
3-



 



 






 




787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART
4:                      ALLEVIATION
OR CESSATION OF PERFORMANCE


Boeing
will not be required to provide any services, training or other things at a
facility designated by Customer if any of the following conditions
exist:





 
      


1.


a
      labor stoppage or dispute at such facility is in progress involving
      Customer;









 
      


2.


wars
      or warlike operations, riots or insurrections in the country where the
      facility is located;









 
      


3.


any
      condition at the facility which, in the opinion of Boeing, is detrimental
      to the general health, welfare or safety of its personnel or their
      families;









 
      


4.


the
      United States Government refuses permission to Boeing personnel or their
      families to enter into the country where the facility is located, or
      recommends that Boeing personnel or their families leave the
      country.





Boeing
will not be required to provide any Materials, services, training or other
things at a facility designated by Customer if the United States Government
refuses permission to Boeing to deliver such Materials, services, training or
other things to the country where the facility is located.

After the
location of Boeing personnel at the facility, Boeing further reserves the right,
upon the occurrence of any of such events, to immediately and without prior
notice to Customer relocate its personnel and their families.






P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1 Rev.: 3/23/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
4-1 



 



 






 




787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART
5:                      PROTECTION
OF PROPRIETARY INFORMATION
AND PROPRIETARY
MATERIALS


1.           General.

All Materials provided by Boeing to
Customer and not covered by a Boeing CSGTA or other agreement between Boeing and
Customer defining Customer's right to use and disclose the Materials and
included information will be covered by and subject to the terms of the AGTA as
amended by the terms of the Purchase Agreement. Title to all Materials
containing, conveying or embodying confidential, proprietary or trade secret
information (Proprietary Information) belonging to Boeing or a third party
(Proprietary Materials), will at all times remain with Boeing or such third
party. Customer will treat all Proprietary Materials and all Proprietary
Information in confidence and use and disclose the same only as specifically
authorized in the AGTA as amended by the terms of the Purchase
Agreement.

2.           License
Grant.

2.1           So
long as Customer owns and operates at least one 787 Aircraft, [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1                                                                 Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
5- 

 



 






 





3.           Use of Proprietary Materials
and Proprietary Information.

Customer is authorized to use
Proprietary Materials and Proprietary Information for the purpose of: (a)
operation, maintenance, repair, or modification of Customer's Aircraft for which
the Proprietary Materials and Proprietary Information have been specified by
Boeing and (b) development and manufacture of training devices and maintenance
tools for use by Customer (c) the manufacture or redesign of any spare part when
permitted under the provisions of the Customer Services General Terms Agreement
between Boeing and Customer, and then only to the extent expressly permitted
therein.  Upon the resale or lease of any Aircraft by Customer, the
purchaser or lessee of such Aircraft may receive from Customer and may use any
Documents furnished hereunder, subject, however, to the foregoing limitations
and any applicable requirements of Article 9 of the AGTA.

4.           Providing of Proprietary
Materials to Contractors.

Customer is authorized to provide
Proprietary Materials to Customer's contractors for the sole purpose of (a)
maintenance, repair, or modification of Customer's Aircraft for which the
Proprietary Materials have been specified by Boeing. In addition, Customer may
provide Proprietary Materials to Customer's contractors for the sole purpose of
(b) developing and manufacturing training devices (c) manufacture or redesign of
any spare part when permitted under the provisions of the Customer Services
General Terms Agreement between Boeing and Customer, and then only to the extent
expressly permitted therein; and (d) developing training programs as
contemplated by Part 1 Section 4 herein and (e) maintenance tools for Customer's
use. Before providing Proprietary Materials to its contractor, Customer will
first obtain a written agreement from the contractor by which the contractor
agrees (a) to use the Proprietary Materials only on behalf of Customer, (b) to
be bound by all of the restrictions and limitations of this Part 5, and (c) that
Boeing is a third party beneficiary under the written agreement. Customer agrees
to provide copies of all such written agreements to Boeing upon request, and
Customer will cooperate with all reasonable requests of Boeing in connection
with enforcing any breach of those agreements by a contractor. A sample
agreement acceptable to Boeing is attached as Appendix V to the
AGTA.

5.           Providing of Proprietary
Materials and Proprietary Information to Regulatory
Agencies.

5.1           When
and to the extent required by a government regulatory agency having jurisdiction
over Customer or an Aircraft, Customer is authorized to provide Proprietary
Materials and to disclose Proprietary Information to the agency for use in
connection with Customer's operation, maintenance, repair, or modification of
such Aircraft. Customer agrees to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
agency from making any distribution, disclosure, or additional use of the
Proprietary Materials and Proprietary Information provided or disclosed.
Customer further agrees to notify Boeing immediately upon learning of any (a)
distribution, disclosure, or additional use by the agency, (b) request to the
agency for distribution, disclosure, or additional use, or (c) intention on the
part of the agency to distribute, disclose, or make additional use of
Proprietary Materials or Proprietary Information.

5.2           In
the event of an Aircraft or Aircraft systems-related incident, the Customer may
suspend, or block access to Customer Information pertaining to its Aircraft or
fleet. Such suspension may be for an indefinite period of time.

6.           Training
Materials.

Training Materials will be provided for
each student.  Such Materials may be used only for either (i) the
individual student’s reference or (ii) Customer’s provision of training to
individuals directly employed by the Customer.






P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1                                                                 Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
5- 

 



 






 






EX-10.138G-H
29
ex10138g-h.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138g-h.htm






 



 






 




ENGINE
ESCALATION
AND
ENGINE
WARRANTY

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit EE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219






P.A. No.
3219
                                                            
EE1 
BOEING PROPRIETARY


 



 






 



1.           ENGINE
ESCALATION.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

























 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iv.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



v.            [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





 
      


vi.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





2.           Values to be Utilized in the
Event of Unavailability.

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



























 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





3.            Engine Warranty and Product
Support Plan

3.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].










































P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



ENGINE
ESCALATION
AND
ENGINE
WARRANTY

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit EE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219





P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



1.           ENGINE
ESCALATION.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]






































[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




























 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iv.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













 
      


v.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


vi.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









2.


Values to be Utilized
      in the Event of
Unavailability.





2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




























 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





3.            Engine Warranty and Product
Support Plan.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138I
30
ex10138i.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138i.htm






 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 



SERVICE
LIFE POLICY COMPONENTS

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit SLP1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A. No.
3219                                                              
SLP1
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
06/28/04
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 



SERVICE
LIFE POLICY COMPONENTS

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787 AIRCRAFT


This is
the listing of Covered Components for the Aircraft which relate to Part 3, Boeing Service Life
Policy of Exhibit C, Product Assurance
Document to the AGTA and is a part of Purchase Agreement No.
3219.





1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(h)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(j)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(k)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(l)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(m)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









2.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(h)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(j)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219                                                            
SLP1-
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
12/15/06
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 








3.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









4.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


5.


Engine
      Strut.









 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219                                                            
SLP1-
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
12/15/06
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 







 
      


6.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(h)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


7.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









NOTE:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219                                                            
SLP1-
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
12/15/06
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138J
31
ex10138j.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138j.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-01   Page
2



3219-01


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc.
(Customer)





Customer
Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (the CSGTA) between Boeing and
Customer, including Supplemental Agreement for Electronic Access (the
“SA-EA”)


This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.





1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.            Boeing
will license and install these Materials on the following
conditions:





 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].










 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













3.           The
technical data and maintenance information specified in Article 3 of Part 3 of
Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the Purchase Agreement will be considered
“Materials” as defined therein and not “Aircraft Software” even when such
technical data and maintenance information is provided in software media and is
used onboard the Aircraft or loaded into an onboard Aircraft
system.

4.           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                          





P.A. No.
3219
787
e-Enabling Letter Agreement
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138K
32
ex10138k.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138k.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
 
3219-02    Page
2
 



3219-02

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616



Subject:                      Special
Terms - Seats and In-flight Entertainment






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787
      aircraft (the Aircraft)







This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All capitalized terms used but not defined in this Letter
Agreement shall have the same meaning as defined in the Purchase
Agreement.

1.Definitions.

1.1           “Covered Seats” shall
mean those seats which are not otherwise identified in Exhibit A to the
Purchase Agreement as Buyer Furnished Equipment.

1.2           “In-flight Entertainment
(IFE) System” shall mean the IFE identified in the Detail
Specification of the Aircraft, inclusive of the IFE software which is required
to test and certify the IFE system on the Aircraft, but exclusive of IFE
Customer Software. 

1.3           “IFE Customer Software” shall
mean any software which is obtained by the Customer from a source other
than Boeing for installation in the IFE System.





2.


Applicability of the
      Provisions of Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the Purchase
      Agreement.





2.1           Notwithstanding
the provisions of Article 7.3 of Part 3 of Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the
Purchase Agreement, [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

2.2           Customer
is hereby advised that the revision service for Materials does not include
changes applicable to the Covered Seats and IFE System.



3.           Applicability of the
Provisions of Exhibit C to the AGTA.

In lieu of the provisions of Part 4 of
Exhibit C to the AGTA, the following warranty and patent and copyright
indemnities will apply to Covered Seats and the IFE System:
“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”

4.           IFE Customer
Software.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC

By                                          

Its                                           




P.A. No.
3219 70820
Special
Terms - Seats and In-flight Entertainment 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138L
33
ex10138l.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138l.htm






 



 






 



3219-04

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616







Subject:


Product
      Assurance - First-Look Inspection
Program









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787
      aircraft





This
Letter Agreement amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement. All terms used
but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the
Purchase Agreement.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.           Warranty
Period.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:
Article
3.1.1 as set forth below is hereby added to Part 2 of Exhibit C to the
AGTA:



P.A. No.
3219
Product
Assurance – First-Look Warranty Program
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-04   Page





“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:




 
      

 



2.       Customer's
Obligations.

Article
6.2.1 of Part 2 of Exhibit C to the AGTA is amended to add the following
provision:
 
“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

3.           Service Life
Policy.

Article
2.2 of Part 3 of Exhibit C to the AGTA is amended to read as
follows:

“2.2.1





(i)  


For
      the 787 aircraft only:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






(ii)  


For
      all other aircraft models:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].















2.2.2





(i)  


For
      the 787 aircraft only:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





(ii)  


For
      all other aircraft models:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”


Article 3
of Part 3 of Exhibit C to the AGTA is amended to read as follows:

“3.           Price
The price
Customer will pay for replacement of a failed SLP Component will be calculated
pursuant to the following formulas:





(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:






(ii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to matters described above, please indicate your acceptance and approval
below.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By
_______________________

Its Attorney-In-Fact


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
 ,
2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By  ___________________

Its
____________________




P.A. No.
3219
Product
Assurance – First-Look Warranty Program
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138M
34
ex10138m.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138m.htm






 



 






 



3219-05

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616

Subject:                      Spare
Parts Commitments





Reference:


a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)









 
      


b)


Customer
      Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (CSGTA) between Boeing and
      Customer





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into as of the date set forth below, and amends and
supplements the CSGTA solely for purposes of
Boeing 787 aircraft.  All capitalized terms
used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the
CSGTA, except for “Aircraft” which will have the meaning as defined in the
Purchase Agreement. Unless otherwise stated all references in this Letter
Agreement to Articles refer to the Articles contained this Letter Agreement. In
consideration of Customer’s purchase of the Aircraft, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.           Definitions.

           1.1           “Customer’s Demand Date” means
the delivery date specified by Customer in its Order to Boeing for a Spare
Part.

           1.2           “Customer Hold Time” means the
period of time between the date on which Boeing requests a decision, information
or act related to a material issue from
Customer and the date Customer provides such decision or information or performs
such act. This includes, but is not limited to time expended (i) waiting for
Customer’s clarification of missing order data or Customer’s approval of
Boeing’s quote for goods or services, (ii) resolving order discrepancies or
technical discrepancies, (iii) obtaining engineering decisions from Customer,
(iv) waiting for receipt of a part which has been shipped to a location other
than the



P.A.
3219
Spare_Parts_Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-05  Page





designated
Boeing service center, and (v) resolving any Boeing constraints on processing an
Order due to the status of Customer’s credit with Boeing.

           1.3           “Beyond Economic Repair” or
“BER” is the term
applied to a part whose repair or overhaul [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

           1.4           “Order Date” means the date on
which an Order is established in accordance with the provisions of the
CSGTA.

           1.5           “Shelf Stock Part” means at any
time a Spares Prone Part that [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

           1.6           “Spares Prone Part” means a
Boeing Spare Part that is identified and recommended by Boeing in its
provisioning data as a part that for the life of the Aircraft can be expected to be
replaced during normal aircraft line maintenance or during overhaul of line
replaceable units due to, failure, wear, deterioration, maintenance, damage,
loss, corrosion, vibration, or temperature.


2.           Delivery Commitment for New
Spare Parts.

           2.1           Boeing
will deliver in accordance with the provisions of the CSGTA within the lead
times specified below, Boeing Spare Parts other than (i) Boeing Spare Parts
ordered as part of Customer’s initial provisioning for an Aircraft or (ii) kits; provided that such Boeing
Spare Parts are Ordered after the execution of this Letter Agreement, and are in
continuous production for an aircraft model in production on the Order
Date.

                      2.1.1                      A
Shelf Stock Part will ship either [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

                      2.1.2                      A
Spares Prone Part that is not a Shelf Stock Part will ship either [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           2.2           For
Boeing Spare Parts not in continuous production on the Order Date, Boeing
will expend reasonable efforts to meet Customer’s Demand Date.


3.           Remedies Regarding
Delivery.

           3.1           If
Boeing anticipates it will be unable to ship a Boeing Spare Part within the
applicable commitment time described in Article 2.1, Boeing may take one or more
of the following actions

3.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           3.3           Subject
to the limitations described in Article 3.4, if Boeing does not satisfy the
requirements of Article 2.1 through one or more of the actions described in
Article 3.1, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           3.4           The
provisions of Article 3.3 will not apply to delay in delivery which is due to
(i) the failure of Customer’s carrier to take possession of the Boeing Spare
Parts, or (ii) is otherwise permitted by applicable law or contract, including
without limitation any provisions relating to excusable delay.

           3.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.           Spare Part Price
Escalation.

           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


5.           Spare Part Price
Formula.

           5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:
 

 
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 

 

           5.2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           5.3           Any
rounding of a number, as required under this Article 5 will be accomplished as
follows: if the first digit of the portion to be dropped from the number to be
rounded is five or greater, the preceding digit will be raised to the next
highest number.


6.           Processing Time Commitment
for Spare Prone Parts Returned for Repair or Overhaul.

6.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. A Spares Prone Part meeting the criteria defined in
this Article 6.1 shall be called a “Qualifying In-Production Spares Prone
Part.”
















6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


7.           Remedies Regarding
Processing Time.

           7.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

7.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

7.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

7.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           7.2           If
as a result of an action described in Article 7.1, Boeing provides to Customer a
suitable repaired or overhauled Qualifying In-Production Spares Prone Part
within the commitment periods described in Article 6.2, or provides
reimbursement in accordance with Article 7.1.3, and in either case, thereafter
completes the applicable contract as soon as such repaired or overhauled part is
available for shipment, Boeing will be deemed to have satisfied the commitments
described in Article 6.2.



           7.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           7.4           The
provisions of Article 7.3 will not apply to delay in delivery which is due to
(i)  Customer Hold Time, (ii) the failure of Customer’s carrier to
take possession of the applicable Qualifying In-Production Spares Prone Part, or
(iii) is otherwise permitted by applicable law or contract, including without
limitation any provisions relating to excusable delay.

           7.5           The
remedies provided in this Article 7 are Customer’s exclusive remedies for
Boeing’s failure to comply with the provisions of Article 6.2 and are in lieu of
all other damages, claims and remedies of Customer arising at law or otherwise
for any failure to meet Customer’s delivery requirements. Customer hereby waives
and renounces all other claims and remedies arising at law or otherwise for any
such failure to meet Customer’s delivery requirements.


8.           Substitution for Obsolete
Spare Parts.

           After
delivery of the first Aircraft, if any unused and undamaged Spare Part purchased
by Customer from Boeing for the Aircraft, or other aircraft in Customer’s fleet
of the same model type, is rendered obsolete and unusable due to a Boeing
initiated change that results in a redesign of the Aircraft or any accessory,
equipment or part thereof, (other than a redesign at Customer’s request),
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


9.           Order of
Precedence.

In the
event of any inconsistency between the terms of this Letter Agreement and the
terms of any other provisions of the CSGTA, the terms of this Letter Agreement
shall control.



P.A.
3219
Spare_Parts_Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-05  Page





10.           Further
Discussions.

Boeing
and Customer agree and understand that Customer may want to pursue other types
of spares provisioning programs, which Boeing may offer now or in the future as
well as a unique program, which Customer may suggest.  Boeing agrees
to enter into good-faith negotiations with Customer on the aforementioned
topics.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By  __________________________

Its     Attorney-In-Fact


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
 ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By  ___________________________

Its   ___________________________




P.A.
3219
Spare_Parts_Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138N
35
ex10138n.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138n.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-06
Page
6



3219-06


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616




Subject:                      Spare
Parts Initial Provisioning





Reference:


a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (the
Aircraft)









 
      


b)


Customer
      Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (CSGTA) between Boeing and
      Customer






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below and amends
and supplements the CSGTA. All capitalized terms used but not defined in this
Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the CSGTA, except for “Aircraft”
which will have the meaning as defined in the Purchase Agreement.

In order
to define the process by which Boeing and Customer will (i) identify those Spare
Parts and Standards critical to Customer’s successful introduction of the
Aircraft into service and its continued operation, (ii) place Orders under the
provisions of the CSGTA as supplemented by the provisions of this Letter
Agreement for those Spare Parts and Standards, and (iii) manage the return of
certain of those Spare Parts which Customer does not use, the parties agree as
follows.

1.           Definitions.

“Provisioning Data” means the
documentation provided by Boeing to Customer, including but not limited to the
Recommended Spare Parts List (RSPL), identifying all Boeing initial provisioning
requirements for the Aircraft.

“Provisioning Items” means the
Spare Parts and Standards identified by Boeing as initial provisioning
requirements in support of the Aircraft, excluding special tools, ground support
equipment (GSE), engines and engine parts.



“Provisioning Products Guide”
means the Boeing Manual D6-81834 entitled “Spares Provisioning Products
Guide”.

2.           Phased
Provisioning.
 
2.1           Provisioning Products
Guide.  Prior to the initial provisioning meeting Boeing will
furnish to Customer a copy of the Provisioning Products Guide.

2.2           Initial Provisioning
Meeting.  On or about twelve (12) months prior to delivery of
the first Aircraft the parties will conduct an initial provisioning meeting
where the procedures, schedules, and requirements for training will be
established to accomplish phased provisioning of Spare Parts and Standards for
the Aircraft in accordance with the Provisioning Products Guide. If the lead
time from execution of the Purchase Agreement until delivery of the first
Aircraft is less than twelve (12) months, the initial provisioning meeting will
be established as soon as reasonably possible after execution of the Purchase
Agreement.

2.3           Provisioning
Data.  During the initial provisioning meeting Customer will
provide to Boeing the operational parameter information described in Chapter 6
of the Provisioning Products Guide. After review and acceptance by Boeing of
such Customer information, Boeing will prepare the Provisioning Data. Such
Provisioning Data will be furnished to Customer on or about [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].after Boeing finalizes the engineering drawings for
the Aircraft. The Provisioning Data will be as complete as possible and will
cover Provisioning Items selected by Boeing for review by Customer for initial
provisioning of Spare Parts and Standards for the Aircraft. Boeing will furnish
to Customer revisions to the Provisioning Data until [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.4           Buyer Furnished Equipment
(BFE) Provisioning Data. Unless otherwise advised by Boeing, Customer
will provide or insure its BFE suppliers provide to Boeing the BFE data in scope
and format acceptable to Boeing, in accordance with the schedule established
during the initial provisioning meeting.

3.           Purchase from Boeing of
Spare Parts and Standards as Initial Provisioning for the
Aircraft.

3.1           Schedule.  In
accordance with schedules established during the initial provisioning meeting,
Customer may place Orders for Provisioning Items and any GSE, special tools, QEC
kits, or engine spare parts, which Customer determines it will initially require
for maintenance, overhaul and servicing of the Aircraft and/or
engines.


3.2           Prices of Initial
Provisioning Spare Parts.

3.2.1  Boeing Spare
Parts.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.2.2  Supplier Spare
Parts.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3           Standards Kits, Raw Material
Kits, Bulk Materials Kits and Service Bulletin Kits.  In
accordance with schedules established during the initial provisioning meeting,
Boeing will furnish to Customer a listing of all components, which could be
included in the Standards kits, raw material kits, bulk materials kits and
service bulletin kits, which may be purchased by Customer from Boeing. Customer
will select, and provide to Boeing its desired content for the kits. Boeing will
furnish to Customer as soon as practicable thereafter a statement setting forth
a firm price for such kits. Customer will place Orders with Boeing for the kits
in accordance with schedules established during the initial provisioning
meeting.

4.           Delivery.

For Spare
Parts and Standards ordered by Customer in accordance with Article 3 of this
Letter Agreement, Boeing will, insofar as reasonably possible, deliver to
Customer such Spare Parts and Standards on dates reasonably calculated to
conform to Customer's anticipated needs in view of the scheduled deliveries of
the Aircraft. Customer and Boeing will agree upon the date to begin delivery of
the provisioning Spare Parts and Standards ordered in accordance with this
Letter Agreement. Where appropriate, Boeing will arrange for shipment of such
Spare Parts and Standards which are manufactured by suppliers directly to
Customer from the applicable supplier's facility. The routing and method of
shipment for initial deliveries and all subsequent deliveries of such Spare
Parts and Standards will be as established at the initial provisioning meeting
and thereafter by mutual agreement.




P.A. No.
3219
Spare_Parts_Initial_ProvisioningRev.:
3/23/05 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-06
Page
6




5.           Substitution for Obsolete
Spare Parts.

5.1           Obligation to Substitute
Pre-Delivery.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.2           Delivery of Obsolete Spare
Parts and Substitutes.  Obsolete
or unusable Spare Parts returned by Customer pursuant to this Article 5 will be
delivered to Boeing F.O.B. at its Seattle Distribution Center or such other
destination as Boeing may reasonably designate. Spare Parts substituted for such
returned obsolete or unusable Spare Parts will be delivered to Customer in
accordance with the CSGTA. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.           Repurchase of Provisioning
Items.

6.1           Obligation to
Repurchase.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.2           Exceptions.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




















6.3           Notification and
Format.  Customer will notify Boeing, in writing when Customer
desires to return Provisioning Items under the provisions of this Article 6.
Customer's notification will include a detailed summary, in part number
sequence, of the Provisioning Items Customer desires to return. Such summary
will be in the form of listings, tapes, diskettes or other media as may be
mutually agreed between Boeing and Customer and will include part number,
nomenclature, purchase order number, purchase order date and quantity to be
returned. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4           Review and Acceptance by
Boeing.  Upon completion of Boeing's review of any detailed
summary submitted by Customer pursuant to Article 6.3, Boeing will issue to
Customer a Material Return Authorization (MRA) for those Provisioning Items
Boeing agrees are eligible for repurchase in accordance with this Article 6.
Boeing will advise Customer of the reason that any Provisioning Item included in
Customer's detailed summary is not eligible for return. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.5           Price and Payment.
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.6           Delivery of Repurchased
Provisioning Items. Provisioning Items repurchased by Boeing pursuant to
this Article 6 will be delivered to Boeing F.O.B. at its Seattle Distribution
Center or such other destination as Boeing may reasonably
designate.





 
      


7.


Title and Risk of
      Loss.





Title and
risk of loss of any Spare Parts or Standards delivered to Customer by Boeing in
accordance with this Letter Agreement will pass from Boeing to Customer in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the CSGTA. Title to and risk of
loss of any Spare Parts or Standards returned to Boeing by Customer in
accordance with this Letter Agreement will pass to Boeing upon delivery of such
Spare Parts or Standards to Boeing in accordance with the provisions of Article
5.2 or Article 6.6, herein, as appropriate.



P.A. No.
3219                                                                                                                     80414
 Rev. 3/23/05
Spare_Parts_Initial_Provisioning
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-06
Page
6








8.


Termination for
      Excusable Delay.





In the
event of termination of the Purchase Agreement pursuant to Article 7 of the AGTA
with respect to any Aircraft, such termination will, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

9.           Order of
Precedence.

In the event of any inconsistency
between the terms of this Letter Agreement and the terms of any other provisions
of the CSGTA, the terms of this Letter Agreement will control.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                             

Its    Attorney-In-Fact


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                             

Its                            



P.A. No.
3219                                                                                                                     80414
 Rev. 3/23/05
Spare_Parts_Initial_Provisioning
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 






EX-10.138O
36
ex10138o.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138o.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-08   Page
3



3219-08


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Open
Configuration Matters






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (the
Aircraft)






This
Letter Agreement amends the Purchase Agreement. All terms used but not defined
in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the Purchase
Agreement.

1.           Aircraft
Configuration.

           1.1           Initial
Configuration.  The initial configuration of Customer's Model
787-923 Aircraft has been defined by Detail Specification 787B1-4102-Rev B,
July 9, 2007 as described in Article 1 and Exhibit A of the Purchase
Agreement (the Aircraft Configuration). [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.2           Final Configuration
Schedule.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219 80111
Open_Configuration_Matters Rev.:
12/17/03
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-08   Page
3



2.           Effect on Purchase
Agreement.

2.1           Basic
Specification.  Changes applicable to the basic Model 787-9
aircraft which are developed by Boeing between the date of signing of the
Purchase Agreement and completion of the final configuration review described in
paragraph 1.2 above will be incorporated into the Aircraft Configuration by
written amendment.

2.2           Exhibit
A.  The effects of all Options, which are mutually agreed upon
between Boeing and Customer for incorporation into the Aircraft Configuration
will be incorporated into Exhibit A of the Purchase Agreement by written
amendment.

2.3           Performance
Guarantees. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.4           Price
Adjustments.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Open_Configuration_Matters Rev.:
12/17/03
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-08   Page
3




3.           Purchase Agreement
Amendment.

Within [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]. after reaching agreement as to the final Aircraft Configuration,
Boeing will provide Customer an amendment to the Purchase Agreement reflecting
the effects of the configuration changes agreed to by the parties.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Open_Configuration_Matters Rev.:
12/17/03
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138P
37
ex10138p.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138p.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




6-1162-AKP-071R1


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616


Subject:                                Purchase
Obligations





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement Nos. 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219 (collectively, the
      Purchase Agreements) between The Boeing Company  and American
      Airlines, Inc. relating to Model 737, 757, 767, 777, and 787 aircraft,
      respectively






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below, and
amends and supplements each Purchase Agreement. This Letter Agreement further
evidences and documents Customer’s commitment, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.           Definitions.

Terms used herein and not defined in
this Letter Agreement have the meanings set forth in the Purchase Agreements.
The following terms, when used in capitalized form, have the following
meanings:

“Boeing Aircraft” means any aircraft
within the MTOW Range manufactured by Boeing.

“Boeing Affiliate Aircraft” means any
aircraft within the MTOW Range manufactured by an Affiliate of Boeing such as
McDonnell Douglas Corporation or its successors.

“Existing Customer Aircraft” means any
Boeing Aircraft, Boeing Affiliate Aircraft or Non-Boeing Aircraft, which is
owned, leased or operated by Customer on the date of this Letter
Agreement.

“Non-Boeing Aircraft” means any
aircraft within the MTOW Range that is neither a Boeing Aircraft nor a Boeing
Affiliate Aircraft.




2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Boeing and Customer agree that, except
as provided in this Letter Agreement, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Nothing in this Letter Agreement shall
preclude Customer from:

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




3.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Purchase
Obligations
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




3.7                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.8           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Purchase
Obligations
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




5.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer and Boeing understand that
certain commercial and financial information contained in this Letter Agreement
are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential. Customer and Boeing agree
that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the information contained herein
as confidential and will not, without the prior written consent of the other,
disclose this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein to any other
person or entity, except as provided in this Letter Agreement or in the Purchase
Agreements.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY



By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.



By                                                              

Its                                                              





P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Purchase
Obligations
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138Q
38
ex10138q.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138q.htm






 



 






 



6-1162-AKP-072R2

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616





Subject:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement Nos. 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219 (the Purchase Agreements)
      between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc. relating to Model
      737, 757, 767, 777 and 787 aircraft,
  respectively





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below and amends
and supplements the Purchase Agreements referenced above. All capitalized terms
used herein but not otherwise defined in this Letter Agreement shall have the
same meanings assigned thereto in Exhibit C to the applicable Purchase
Agreement or elsewhere in such Purchase Agreement. This Letter Agreement
supercedes and replaces in its entirety Letter
Agreement  6-1162-AKP-072R1 dated April 23, 2004.


1.           Definitions.

Terms used herein and not defined in
this Letter Agreement have the meanings set forth in the Purchase Agreements.
The following terms, when used in capitalized form, have the following
meanings:

“AA Aircraft” means, as the context
requires, (i) a Firm Aircraft, (ii) a Rights Aircraft, (iii) a Substitute
Aircraft or (iv) any aircraft described in Section 2.2 of this Letter Agreement
once price terms have been established for such aircraft pursuant to Section 8
of this Letter Agreement. The first three categories of aircraft in the
preceding sentence are defined in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075,
6-1162-AKP-089R2, 6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1 and
6-1162-TRW-0664.

“AA Auditor” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 7.2.3 hereto.

“Adjustment” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 3.2 hereto.

“Affiliate” shall have the meaning set
forth in Exhibit C to the Purchase Agreement.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Boeing” for the purposes of this
Letter Agreement, means The Boeing Company and each of its direct  and
indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries.

“Boeing Affiliate Aircraft” has the
meaning set forth in Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-071R1 and includes Existing MDC
Aircraft.

“Boeing Auditor” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 7.2.1 hereto.

“Business Day” shall mean any day other
than a Saturday, Sunday, or a day that commercial banks are authorized or
required by law, regulation or executive order to be closed in Seattle,
Washington or Fort Worth, Texas.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Credit Memorandum” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“Derivative” has the meaning set forth
in Letter Agreements  6-1162-AKP-075, 6-1162-AKP-089R2,
6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1  and 6-1162-TRW-0664 as
applicable.

“Eligible AA Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.1.1 hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Evaluation” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 3.2 hereto.

“Existing MDC Aircraft” means any model
of aircraft within the MTOW Range manufactured by McDonnell Douglas Corporation
prior to October 31, 1997.

“Firm
Aircraft” shall have the meaning set forth in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075,
6-1162-AKP-089R2, 6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1 and 6-1162-TRW-0664, as
applicable.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:





(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









(ii)  


Customer
      has:









a.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









b.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“4Q Certification” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.7.1 hereto.

“Future Boeing Models” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 2.2 hereto.

“Inconsistencies” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“Independent Evaluation” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 7.2.1 hereto.

“Initial Credit Memo” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“Initial Report” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








“MTOW Range” has the meaning set forth
in Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-071R1.

“Non-Priced Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 2.2 hereto.

“OA Contract” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 7.2.3 hereto.

“OA Scheduled Delivery Date” means the
original scheduled delivery date [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Prospective Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 4.2 hereto.

“Prospective Evaluation” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 4.2 hereto.

“Records” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 7.2.10 hereto.

“Report Credit Due Date” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.7.2 hereto.

“Report Credit Memo” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.7.1 hereto.

“Review Meeting” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 7.1.1 hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Rights Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075, 6-1162-AKP-089R2,
6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1 and 6-1162-TRW-0664, as
applicable.

“Successor Model” has the meaning set
forth in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075, 6-1162-AKP-089R2, 6-1162-AKP-100R1,
6-1162-AKP-110R1 and 6-1162-TRW-0664, as applicable.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Whitetail Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 9.1 hereto.


2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

4.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















4.1.4                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].































5.           Establishing Eligibility for
and Issuing Credit Memoranda.

5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.1.1 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.1.2 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:
5.2.1              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2.2              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2.3              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








5.2.4              [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.2.5              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.3              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.4              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.5              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















5.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7.3             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


6.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].











6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


7.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1.3             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].










7.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.3             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.4.             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)         [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

(b)         [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















7.2.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.6                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

7.2.7                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

7.2.8.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8.4                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.9                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.10                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







8.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

8.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

8.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].























8.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.3.           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].
 
9.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

9.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



































9.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


10.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





































11.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer and Boeing understand that
certain commercial and financial information contained in this Letter Agreement
are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential.  Customer and
Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the information
contained herein as confidential and will not, without the prior written consent
of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein
to any other person or entity, except as provided in this Letter Agreement or in
the Purchase Agreements.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY



By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.



By                                                              

Its  VP Corporate
Development and Treasurer






Attachment
    A:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      B:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      C:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      D:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      E:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 




Examples

1. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




2. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




3. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      

24

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      

0

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




4. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002

 
      

2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 





5. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003

 
      

2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




6. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




7. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004

 
      
 
      

2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 





8. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004

 
      

2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

0

 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




9. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



10. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004


2005


2006


2007




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 




11. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      

2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




12. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 




13. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:





[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      




(i)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      

2005


2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(ii)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TOA REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      

2005


2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(iii)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

X

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
(iv)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000

 
      
 
      

2003

 
      

2005


2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
B to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 1 




Form of
Certification


The
undersigned certifies that he or she is either the President or the Chief
Financial Officer (or functional equivalent) of Boeing Commercial Airplanes, and
that, as such, he or she is authorized to execute this Certification on behalf
of The Boeing Company pursuant to Letter Agreement No. 6-1162-AKP-072R1.
Capitalized terms used herein but not defined have the meanings set forth in the
foregoing Letter Agreement.

The
undersigned hereby certifies that:

A.              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:




 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Notes:

B.              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

In
witness whereof, the undersigned has hereunto subscribed his name this ____ day
of ______________, ___.





By:

 
 






P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
C to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

Prospective
Evaluation for
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

Boeing
has determined that the following are [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

Aircraft
Model

 
      

Delivery
      Year



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
D to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




2. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
D to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page





4. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
E to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page
1




Form of
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. (with example data)

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



Form of
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. (with example data)

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 






EX-10.138R
39
ex10138r.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138r.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-073R1  Page
4




6-1162-AKP-073R1


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616


Subject:                                Accident
Claims and Litigation





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement Nos. 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219 (collectively, the
      Purchase Agreements) between The Boeing Company and American Airlines,
      Inc. relating to Model 737, 757, 767, 777, 787 Aircraft,
      respectively





This letter agreement (Letter
Agreement) is entered into on the date below, and amends and supplements each
Purchase Agreement. Capitalized terms used herein but not otherwise defined
shall have the meanings assigned thereto in Exhibit C to the applicable
Purchase Agreement or elsewhere in such Purchase Agreement.

1.           Scope.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.           Initial
Meeting.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
3.           Subsequent
Meetings.

The parties will meet periodically
after the initial meeting in order to review [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.           Resolution of Other
Matters.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

8.           Punitive
Damages.
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

9.           Insurance
Coverage.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

10.           Miscellaneous.

10.1           All
rights and obligations of the parties under this Letter Agreement shall accrue
and apply solely to the parties and their successors and permitted assigns and
there is no intent to benefit any third parties.

10.2           Each
party shall do and perform, at such party’s expense, such further acts and
execute and deliver such further instruments and documents as may be required by
applicable law or as may be reasonably requested by the other party to
effectuate the purposes of this Letter Agreement.

10.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                                              

Its                                                              




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Accident
Claims and Litigation
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138S
40
ex10138s.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138s.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1031  Page
3



6-1162-CLO-1031


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Performance
Guarantee Matters






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








 
      


(b)


Letter
      Agreement No. 6-1162-TRW-0671 entitled Performance Guarantees (the
      Performance Guarantees)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           Performance
Guarantees.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Guarantee Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1031  Page
3



2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


3.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Guarantee Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1031  Page
3




4.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Guarantee Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138T
41
ex10138t.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138t.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1032  Page
6



6-1162-CLO-1032


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








 
      


(b)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 1979 between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc.
      relating to Model 767-323ER
aircraft








 
      


(
      c)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 1980 between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc
      relating to Model 777-223IGW
aircraft








 
      


(d)


Security
      Agreement dated October 16, 2002 between The Boeing Company and American
      Airlines, Inc.






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           Introduction.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      





2.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].











[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


4.           Availability of
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT] Aircraft.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

4.1.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

4.2.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.2.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


5.           Purchase
Obligations.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


6.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


7.           Security Agreement and Other
Subsequent Agreement Amendments.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].














[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1032  Page
6




9.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
understands and agrees that the information contained herein represents
confidential business information and has value precisely because it is not
available generally or to other parties.  Customer agrees to limit the
disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          


Attachments:





1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








2.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








3.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








4.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 




Attachment
1 – 767 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
1 – 767 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
2 – 777 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
2 – 777 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
3 – 767 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
3 – 767 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
4 – 777 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
4 – 777 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                    SA
No. 6 Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                    SA
No. 6 Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. 17 Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1980                                  SA
No. 17



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138U
42
ex10138u.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138u.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1039   Page
2



6-1162-CLO-1039

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


Extended
      Warranty Option




 




Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc.
(Customer)




 
 
This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.
 
 




1.  


General.




 
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 




2.  


Extended Warranty
      [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
      COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
    TREATMENT].




 
 




2.1  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
 




2.2  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
 




2.3  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
 




3.  


Confidential
      Treatment.




 
 
Customer
understands that Boeing considers certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement as confidential.  Customer agrees
that it will treat this Letter Agreement and the information contained herein as
confidential and will not, without the prior written consent of Boeing, disclose
this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein to any other person or
entity, except as required by law or government regulation.
 
 

 
 
Very
truly yours,
 
 

 
THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                          





P.A. No.
3219
Extended
Warranty Option
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138V
43
ex10138v.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138v.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1043  Page





6-1162-CLO-1043


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616

Subject:                      787
Inspection Process





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.





1.  


Inspection
      Process





The AGTA
is hereby amended by adding the following new Section 5.6 immediately following
Section 5.5 of the AGTA for the 787 Aircraft, the intent of which is to define
the 787 inspection process [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the representations,
warranties, indemnities and agreements of Boeing made in the AGTA or the
Purchase Agreement shall not be affected or deemed waived by reason of any
investigation made by Customer pursuant to this Letter Agreement.

“5.6           Inspection
Process.

5.6.1                      787 Inspection
Procedures.

The 787
customer inspection program is similar to other Boeing commercial customer
inspection systems with modifications, which are required to support the
shortened manufacturing cycle of the 787. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]. Boeing will make available to Customer on a non-disruption and
non-interference basis, access to the 787 Aircraft to perform certain Customer
inspections, pursuant to the Customer Quality Support document in Attachment A
hereto (which may be amended or supplemented from time to time), except as
depicted in paragraph 5.6.2 below.


5.6.2                      General.

CQS will
facilitate Customer’s inspections of the 787 Aircraft during the manufacturing
process through a standard set of hardware inspection opportunities, technical
reviews, and data sharing. As an accommodation for the Customer, [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.  Assignment

This
Letter Agreement is being provided to Customer as an accommodation and cannot be
assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of Boeing,
which such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.




P.A. No.
3219
787
Inspection Process
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1043  Page






3.  Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
understands and agrees that certain commercial and/or financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing as
confidential.  Customer agrees that it will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the written consent of Boeing, disclose this Letter Agreement or any
information contained here in to any other person or entity, except as may be
required by law or governmental regulations.

If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding or our agreement with respect
to the matters set forth above, please indicate your acceptance and approval
below.  This Letter Agreement will become effective upon signature by
Boeing and Customer.

EXECUTED
on _________________


THE
BOEING COMPANY

By
_____________________

Its____Attorney-In-Fact____

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
_______________________, 2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By
_____________________________

Its
______________________________














P.A. No.
3219
787
Inspection Process
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1043  Page





[Missing Graphic Reference]







Customer
Services during Production






[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























BOEING
PROPRIETARY



P.A. No.
3219
787
Inspection Process
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A ii





BOEING
PROPRIETARY



BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A iii





BOEING
PROPRIETARY



BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 1





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 2





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 3





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 4





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 5





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 6





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 7





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 8





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 9





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 10





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 11





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 12





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 13





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 14





BOEING
PROPRIETARY





BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 






EX-10.138W
44
ex10138w.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138w.htm






 



 






 



6-1162-CLO-1042

American
Airlines, Inc.
2000
Eagle Parkway
MD
8250
Fort
Worth, TX 76177

Subject:                      Contribution
Toward Third Party Damages





Reference:


Customer
      Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (CSGTA), Letter Agreement 23-1A
      to the CSGTA and Supplemental Agreement No. SA-eE dated December 21, 2007
      (SA-eE) to the CSGTA between The Boeing Company (Boeing) and American
      Airlines, Inc. (Customer)





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) supersedes Letter Agreement 6-1181-OC-00703
dated December 19, 2007, amends and supplements the CSGTA, Letter Agreement
23-1A to the CSGTA and Supplemental Agreement No. SA-eE.  Capitalized
terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the CSGTA, Letter Agreement 23-1A to the CSGTA and SA-eE.





1.  


Contribution Toward
      Third Party Damages.





Clause
12.4 of Letter Agreement 23-1A to the CSGTA which modifies Customer’s CSGTA is
hereby replaced with the text below solely as applied to the SA-eE:

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”





2.  


Assignment.





This
Letter Agreement is being provided to Customer as an accommodation and cannot be
assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of
Boeing.





3.  


Confidential
      Treatment.





Customer
understands and agrees that certain commercial and/or financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing as
confidential.  Customer agrees that it will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the written consent of Boeing, disclose this Letter Agreement or any
information contained



P.A. No.
3219
Contribution
Toward Third Parties
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1042   Page
2




herein to
any other person or entity, except as may be required by law or governmental
regulations.

If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to the matters set forth above, please indicate your acceptance and approval
below.  This Letter Agreement will become effective upon signature by
Boeing and Customer.

EXECUTED
on __________________


AMERICAN
AIRLINES,
INC.                                                                                           THE
BOEING COMPANY


_________________________                                                                                           __________________________
Signature                                                                                Signature
_________________________                                                                                           __________________________
Printed
Name                                                                                Printed
Name
_________________________                                                                                           __________________________
Title                                                                      Title




P.A. No.
3219
Contribution
Toward Third Parties
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138X
45
ex10138x.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138x.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1045  Page
2



6-1162-CLO-1045


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








(b)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








(c)  


Letter
      Agreement No. 6-1162-TRW-0664 entitled Aircraft Purchase Rights and
      Substitution Rights





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.




P.A. No.
3219
Treatment
of Aircraft Delivering Beyond the MFC Period
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1045  Page
2




3           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Treatment
of Aircraft Delivering Beyond the MFC Period
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138Y
46
ex10138y.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138y.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1046  Page
2



6-1162-CLO-1046


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      SA-eE,
COTS Software, and End User License Matters





Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)




(b) Supplemental
Agreement No. SA-eE dated December 21, 2007 ( the SA-eE)
(c) Letter
Agreement No. 6-1162-TRW-0668 entitled Special Matters Relating to COTS Software
and End User License Agreements


This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           787
SA-eE.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219
SA-eE
Matters, COTS Software and End User License Matters 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1046  Page
2




2.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.

3.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
SA-eE
Matters, COTS Software and End User License Matters 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138Z
47
ex10138z.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138z.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1047  Page
3



6-1162-CLO-1047


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.






1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
1.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

1.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.




P.A. No.
3219
Reduced
Advance Payment Schedule Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1047  Page
3




3.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Reduced
Advance Payment Schedule Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AA
48
ex10138aa.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138aa.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1048  Page
3



6-1162-CLO-1048


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Final
Matters






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








 
      


(b)


Letter
      Agreement No. 6-1162-CLO-0664 entitled Aircraft Purchase Rights and
      Substitution Rights






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.


1.           Introduction.

The
delivery schedule for the Aircraft is uncertain due to the current labor strike
by the International Association of Machinists (the IAM) and the upcoming labor
negotiations with the Society of Professional Engineering Employees in Aerospace
(SPEEA).  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.           Revised Delivery Schedule
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


3.           Airframe and Engine
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.




P.A. No.
3219
Final
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1048  Page
3




5           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Final
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AB
49
ex10138ab.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ab.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1049  Page
5



6-1162-CLO-1049


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      CS1
Matters






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)





(b)           Supplemental
Exhibit CS1 entitled 787 Product Support Document


This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

This
letter sets forth terms and conditions, which are beyond Boeing’s normal product
support offering as set forth in reference (b).

1.           Part 1, paragraph 5.9
regarding Additional Terms and Conditions.

The
following sentence is hereby added to the end of paragraph 5.9 of Part 1 of
reference (b):

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

2.           Part 2, paragraph 1.1
regarding Field Service Representation.

The
following paragraph replaces and supersedes paragraph 1.1 of Part 2 of reference
(b):

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Part 2, par. 2.1.4 regarding
Engineering Support Services.

The
following paragraph replaces and supersedes paragraph 2.1.4 of Part 2 of
reference (b):

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”





4.  


Part 3, par. 6
      regarding Revisions.





The
following paragraphs are added after paragraph 6.1 of Part 3 of reference
(b):

“6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
CS1
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1049  Page
5








5.  


Part 3, par. 7
      regarding Supplier Technical
Data.





The
following paragraphs are added following paragraph 7.3 of Part 3 of reference
(b):

“7.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           7.6           Customer
will be supplied with the following supplier technical data for repairable
equipment:





(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(ii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
      AND FILED SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(iii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
      AND FILED SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(iv)  


 [CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(v)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
      AND FILED SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]”











6.           Part 6 regarding
Other.

Part 6
entitled “Other” as set forth below is hereby added to reference
(b).

“787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART
6:   OTHER


1           Additional Technical Data
and Documents.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”

7.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.



P.A. No.
3219
CS1
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1049  Page
5




8.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
CS1
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AC
50
ex10138ac.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ac.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0664
Page 




6-1162-TRW-0664


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas/Ft.
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616


Subject:                      Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 between The Boeing Company (Boeing) and American
      Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923 aircraft (Purchase
      Agreement)






This letter agreement (“Letter Agreement”) is
entered into on the date below, and constitutes a part of the Purchase
Agreement, as the same may hereafter be amended, modified or supplemented and
including, without limitation, as part thereof the exhibits, appendices,
schedules, attachments and letter agreements thereto.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.           Definitions.                                Capitalized
terms used herein and not defined pursuant to this Letter Agreement have the
meanings set forth in the  Purchase Agreement. The following terms,
when used in capitalized form, have the following meanings:

“Applicable Delivery
Month” means: (a) with respect to each Firm Aircraft, the Scheduled
Delivery Month for such aircraft; (b) with respect to each Rights
Aircraft
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].; (c) with respect to each
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].and specified to Customer pursuant to
Section 4.2
hereof; and (d) with respect to each [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].specified therefor (or such other month in which a Delivery Position
has been reserved for such aircraft in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Section
4.3).

“Applicable Purchase
Agreement” means: (a) when used with respect to any Rights Aircraft or
Substitute Aircraft that is a model 787-923, the  Purchase Agreement;
(b) when used with respect to any Rights Aircraft or Substitute Aircraft that is
a model 787-823 or model 787-323, the purchase agreement executed and delivered
pursuant to Section
8.2 hereof in connection with Customer's first purchase (if any) of such
model, as such purchase agreement may be supplemented, amended or
modified;

           “Available Position”
means any Delivery Position that is available in Boeing's judgment for the
delivery of a Rights Aircraft to Customer in connection with the exercise of a
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Available Introduction
Position” means an Introduction Position that is available in Boeing's
judgment for the delivery of a Rights Aircraft or Substitute Aircraft (as the
case may be) with an interior configuration not previously certified by the
FAA.

“Business Day” means
Monday through Friday, except for federal or state holidays.

“Committed Month”
means the month reserved by Boeing and set forth in Attachment A hereto
for delivery of each [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Delivery Position”
means that portion of the production rate that is or may from time to time be
allocated by Boeing or its Affiliate for the manufacture of a model 787 aircraft
(or any Derivative or Successor) and delivery of such aircraft in a specified
month.

“Derivative” means any
airframe model that is a derivative of the model 787 (other than a model 787-8
or model 787-3) that is developed by Boeing or an Affiliate of Boeing subsequent
to the date hereof.

“Eligible Model” means
all or any combination thereof, as the context requires, of the following listed
airframe model types, in each case manufactured in accordance with the
applicable Detail Specification identified on Attachment C hereto,
as such Detail Specification may be modified from time to time in accordance
with Article 4 of the AGTA or as otherwise mutually agreed to by Boeing and
Customer:

(a)           at
any time, the Boeing model 787-923;





 
      


(b)


in
      the case of the Boeing model 787-823 or 787-323, such model will be an
      Eligible Model:









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


any
      Derivative or Successor Model from and after such time as it is deemed to
      be an Eligible Model in accordance with the provisions of Section 9
      hereof.





“Expiration Date”
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Firm Advance
Payments” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.3
hereof.

“Firm Aircraft” means:
(a) the [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].identified as of the date
hereof on Table 1 to the 787-923 Purchase Agreement; and (b) any aircraft
incorporated after the date hereof in an Applicable Purchase Agreement pursuant
to Section 8
hereof.

“Introduction
Position” means each Delivery Position for an Aircraft with an interior
configuration not previously certified by the FAA that is designated by Boeing
in the ordinary course of business as a customer introduction production
position.

“Launch Program” means
a program initiated by Boeing to design, manufacture and obtain FAA type
certification for a new model type of aircraft (e.g., Model B797), or a new
sub-model type of aircraft (e.g., Model 787-10). A Launch Program may require
that certain conditions be met by customers ordering aircraft subject to the
Launch Program, which may include but not be limited to: (i) minimum number of
customers; (ii) engine availability; (iii) use of customers’ aircraft for
certification and development purposes; (iv) additional restrictions on optional
features available; and (v) restrictions on the availability of Delivery
Positions for aircraft purchased pursuant to the exercise of certain purchase
rights. Such conditions will no longer be applicable upon completion of the
Launch Program.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” as designated in Attachment A hereto,
provided that if any such date is not a Business Day, then such [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].shall be the next succeeding Business
Day.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.1
hereof.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].” has the meaning set forth in Section 2
hereof.

“Modified Exercise
Notice” means a notice delivered by Customer pursuant to Section 4.3(b)
hereof.

“Proposal Deposit”
means, with respect to each Eligible Model, that amount designated in Attachment C hereto
as the “[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]” for such model.

“Purchase Agreement
Supplement” means any supplement to an Applicable Purchase Agreement,
substantially in the form of Attachment D hereto
or otherwise in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to Boeing and
Customer, from time to time executed and delivered pursuant to Section
8.1.

“Purchase Rights”
means, collectively, the [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].granted
pursuant hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” means the “Rights Aircraft Exercise Lead Time Exercise Date” as
designated in Attachment B hereto,
provided that if any such date is not a Business Day, then such [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].shall be the next succeeding Business
Day.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.2
hereof.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 2
hereof.

“Requested Delivery
Month” means such month(s) in which Customer desires delivery of a Rights
Aircraft subject to a[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], as specified by
Customer in a [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..

“Rights Aircraft”
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.3
hereof.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 2
hereof.

“Substitute Aircraft”
means any aircraft which Customer has designated, pursuant to Section 5.1 hereof,
to be delivered in lieu of a Firm Aircraft.

“Substitution Notice”
has the meaning set forth in Section 5.1
hereof.

“Successor Model”
means [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Then Current Engine
Price” means the Engine Price of Rights Aircraft or Substitute Aircraft
set by the Engine Supplier as of the date of execution of a Purchase Agreement
Supplement entered into by Boeing and Customer.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Information.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3           Concurrently
with the disclosure by Boeing or any Affiliate of Boeing to any other customer
or potential customer of plans to study the development of a Derivative or a
Successor Model, Boeing will make available to Customer information, in
reasonable detail, regarding such Derivative or Successor Model, including, but
not limited to, the product development activities and schedule with respect
thereto.

3.4           Boeing
will inform Customer of, and offer Customer the opportunity to participate in,
any airline working group or other forum sponsored by Boeing for the purpose of
soliciting the input of potential customers in connection with the development
of any Derivative or any Successor Model.

3.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



4.           Exercise of Purchase
Rights.

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      

 



5.           Substitution
Right.

5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



PA No.
3219
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0664
Page 




6.           Aircraft Price and Credit
Memoranda.

6.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.3.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


7.           Payments.

7.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].























8.           Forms of
Agreement.

8.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT];









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT];









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













9.           Derivative
and Successor Models.  If prior to the
Expiration Date Boeing and Customer agree upon terms and conditions (including,
without limitation, any applicable launch program conditions) for the purchase
of a Derivative or Successor Model pursuant to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-072R2
as may be amended from time to time, such Derivative or Successor Model shall be
deemed to be an Eligible Model hereunder, and Customer shall be entitled,
subject to the terms hereof, to exercise any Purchase Right for the purchase of
such Derivative or Successor Model and/or to exercise its right of substitution
to have such Derivative or Successor Model delivered in lieu of any Firm
Aircraft.

10.           Production
Capacity Assurances.  If Customer has
exercised all of the MADP Rights and QADP Rights granted hereby and desires to
purchase a sufficient number of Rights Aircraft that would, in Boeing's
reasonable judgment, economically justify an increase in the production rate for
the model type of aircraft Customer desires to purchase, Boeing shall use its
best reasonable efforts to increase the production rate for such
aircraft.

11.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].  Notwithstanding anything in this Letter
Agreement, Customer’s [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
























12.           Confidential
Treatment.  Customer and
Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information contained in
this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential.
Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the
information contained herein as confidential and will not, without the prior
written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement or any information
contained herein to any other person or entity, except as provided in this
Letter Agreement or in the Applicable Purchase Agreements.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its     Attorney-In-Fact              


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

____ day
of                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                           


Attachment
A:                                Information
regarding MADP Rights
Attachment
B:                                Information
regarding QADP Rights
Attachment
C:                                Description
and Price for Eligible Models
Attachment
D:                                Form
of Purchase Agreement Supplement
Attachment
E:                                Letter
Agreements



PA No.
3219
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
A to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
MADP
Option
Rights
Aircraft Exercise Lead Time Exercise Date












[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




























PA
3219 Page 1 of 1


 



 






 



Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
QADP
Option
Rights
Aircraft Exercise Lead Time Exercise Date












[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




























PA
3219 Page 1 of 1


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-1O.TXT Page
1


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-1O.TXT Page
2


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-1O.TXT Page
3


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-2O.TXT Page
1


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-2O.TXT Page
2


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-2O.TXT Page
3


 



 






 


Attachment
D to
6-1162-TRW-0664




PURCHASE
AGREEMENT SUPPLEMENT NO. [___]

PURCHASE AGREEMENT SUPPLEMENT NO. 3219,
dated [__________, ____], between The Boeing Company (“Boeing”) and American
Airlines, Inc. (“Customer”).

R E C I T A L S:

A.           Boeing
and Customer have heretofore entered into (i) that certain Purchase Agreement
No. 3219, dated [__________], 2007 (capitalized terms used herein without
definition shall have the meanings specified therefor in such Purchase
Agreement), and (ii) that certain Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664 (the “Rights
Letter”), providing for the execution and delivery from time to time of Purchase
Agreement Supplements, each substantially in the form hereof, for the purpose of
subjecting Rights Aircraft and Substitute Aircraft to the Purchase Agreement as
and when purchased by Customer in accordance with the terms of the Rights
Letter.

B.           Customer
has exercised its right under the Rights Letter to purchase the aircraft
described below pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Purchase Agreement
as supplemented by this Purchase Agreement Supplement.

In consideration of the foregoing
premises and other good and sufficient consideration, Boeing and Customer hereby
agree as follows:

1.           Aircraft
Description.  Boeing will
manufacture and sell to Customer, and Customer will purchase, the aircraft
described in Table 1-[__] attached hereto and made a part hereof.

2.           Delivery
Schedule.  The Scheduled
Delivery Month of each aircraft is set forth in Table 1-[__].

3.           Price.  The Aircraft
Basic Price and each component thereof and the Advance Payment Base Price for
the aircraft are set forth in Table 1-[__].

4.           Payment.

4.1           Boeing
acknowledges receipt of a Deposit in the amount of [$_________] for each
aircraft.

4.2           Customer
will make advance payments to Boeing in the amount of [____%] of the Advance
Payment Base Price of each aircraft, beginning with a payment of [__%], less the
Deposit, on the date of this Purchase Agreement Supplement for each
aircraft.  Additional payments for each aircraft are due on the first
Business Day of the months and in the amounts listed in Table
1-[__].

4.3           For
any aircraft described on Table 1-[___] having a Scheduled Delivery Month less
than twenty-four (24) months from the date of this Purchase Agreement
Supplement, the total amount of advance payments due upon the date of this
Purchase Agreement Supplement will include all advance payments that are or were
due on or before such date in accordance with the advance payment schedule set
forth in Table 1-[___].

5.           Purchase
Agreement.  All of the terms
and provisions of the Purchase Agreement are hereby incorporated by reference in
this Purchase Agreement Supplement to the same extent as if fully set forth
herein; and each reference therein to “Aircraft” shall be deemed to include the
aircraft described in Table 1-[__] attached hereto.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Boeing and Customer
have each caused this Purchase Agreement Supplement No. [____] to be duly
executed as of the day and year first above written.


THE
BOEING COMPANY


By:_____________________________

Name:__________________________

Title:___________________________                                                                                                                     


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By:_____________________________

Name:__________________________


Title:___________________________                                                                                                                     




PA No.
3219                                                                                                                                
Page 
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


Attachment
E to
6-1162-TRW-0664







The following letter agreements, as may
be amended from time to time, between Boeing and Customer will be expressly
incorporated by reference in any purchase agreement executed and delivered by
the parties pursuant to Section 8.2 of this
Letter Agreement:

Letter Agreement
No.                                                      Subject





6-1162-TRW-0670


Miscellaneous
      Commitments for Model 787





6-1162-AKP-071R1                                                      Purchase
Obligations





6-1162-AKP-072R2


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





6-1162-AKP-073R1                                                      Accident
Claims and Litigation

6-1162-TRW-0674                                                      Business
Considerations





 
      


3219-05


Spares
      Commitments









6-1162-TRW-0673


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























PA No.
3219
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AD
51
ex10138ad.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ad.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0665
Page
2



6-1162-TRW-0665


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (the
Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

Customer
has requested and Boeing has agreed that [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], and Boeing and Customer
shall execute a Supplemental Agreement to the Purchase Agreement conforming
Table 1, Supplemental Exhibit EE1 and the Performance Guarantees to Customer’s
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219 80227
Alternate_Engine_Selection Rev.:
01/08/04
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0665
Page
2



Confidential
Treatment.                                                      Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement or in the applicable Purchase
Agreement.




Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          






P.A. No.
3219
Alternate_Engine_Selection Rev.:
01/08/04
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AE
52
ex10138ae.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ae.htm






 



 






 


Boeing Commercial Airplanes

P.O. Box 3707 
Seattle , WA 98124-2207 

[Missing Graphic Reference] 





6-1166-TRW-0666

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616
 
Subject:                      TRENT1000-J
Powered 787-9 Performance Retention Commitment
 




Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase
      Agreement) between The Boeing Company (Boeing)
      and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer)
      relating to Model 787-923 Aircraft (Aircraft).




 
This
Letter Agreement (Letter
Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement.  All
terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the Purchase Agreement.
 
Boeing
recognizes that performance retention within reasonable limits is essential to
maintain the economy of operation of the Aircraft.  Therefore the
parties hereto agree as follows with respect to performance
retention.
 




1.  


Aircraft
      Commitment.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Covered Aircraft shall be defined as a
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..
 
Boeing
commits to Customer that, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], as
defined in Attachment A, during the Performance Retention Term, as defined in
paragraph 2 below, will not exceed the levels shown in the table below (Aircraft
Commitment).
 




Time
      After Delivery of the First Covered Aircraft


Cumulative
      Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration Commitment (%)



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      



 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 




2.  


Applicability and
      Performance Retention Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




2.1  


Delivery Schedule for
      Covered Aircraft.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, it is anticipated that Boeing will deliver
the Covered Aircraft to Customer in accordance with the delivery schedule set
forth in Attachment C.  If the fleet size and delivery schedule is
significantly different, the Aircraft Commitment may be appropriately adjusted
to reflect such changes.
 
 




2.2  


Performance Retention
      Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




3.  


Conditions.




 




3.1  


Operation and
      Maintenance.




 
Customer shall operate and maintain
the Covered Aircraft in accordance with Customer’s FAA-approved operations and
maintenance programs.  Customer shall operate and maintain the engines
in accordance with the Operation and Maintenance Manuals and Customer's
Maintenance Program and an Engine Management Program mutually defined and agreed
to by the Engine Manufacturer and Customer.
 




3.2  


Powerback.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.3                  Flight Cycle Utilization and
Derate.


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
In the
event Customer employs a Covered Aircraft during the Performance Retention Term
of this Letter Agreement within the Customer’s system such that the operation is
greater than the maximum assumed values or lower than the minimum assumed values
then the parties agree to make adjustments to the Basic Data, defined in
Paragraph 4 below, solely with respect to such Covered Aircraft, as a
consequence of such usage.
 




4.  


Determination of Fuel
      Mileage Deterioration.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
Following
the delivery of each Covered Aircraft to Customer by Boeing, and continuing
until expiration of the Performance Retention Term, Customer shall record,
analyze, and forward to Boeing cruise fuel mileage data obtained on such Covered
Aircraft as specified in Attachment B (Basic
Data)

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




5.  


Notice of Performance
      Deterioration.




[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





6.  


Election of
      Actions.




 
Upon
Boeing's receipt of any notice that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration exceeds, or is likely to exceed the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing
and Customer, as appropriate, will take the following actions:
 
[Missing
Graphic
Reference]                                6.1           Data.
 
Boeing
will evaluate the Basic Data.  At its option, Boeing may accomplish
such evaluation by analysis of Customer’s raw ACMS data or by obtaining
additional performance data on such Covered Aircraft in accordance with
Attachment B.  Such additional data may include data acquired during
revenue service with Boeing personnel aboard as observers.  The Basic
Data and any additional data obtained by Boeing in its evaluation shall be
appropriately adjusted to reflect any material changes elected by Customer to
the Covered Aircraft which have occurred subsequent to delivery of the Covered
Aircraft, including any replacement of one or more of the engines installed on a
Covered Aircraft.  Additionally, adjustments will be applied for any
relevant factors as agreed by Customer and Boeing (e.g., inaccuracies in flight
deck instrumentation, a sudden increase in deterioration that is attributed to a
foreign object damage event such as severe hail and the additional rate of
deterioration for Aircraft used for pilot training.)  If Boeing and
Customer are in disagreement as to such evaluation of the Basic Data, such
disagreement shall be resolved by good faith technical negotiation between the
parties including, as necessary, the Engine Manufacturer.
 

 

 
6.2                  Surveys.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
6.3                  Weight.
 
Boeing
may request that Customer weigh such Covered Aircraft, in which event Customer
agrees to weigh such Covered Aircraft in conjunction with its normally scheduled
maintenance and will report its findings to Boeing.
 




6.4  


Corrective
      Actions.




 
Boeing shall promptly make such
recommendations to Customer that Boeing believes would result in improvement of
the cruise fuel mileage performance of such Covered Aircraft based on analysis
of the surveys and available data pursuant to Paragraphs 6.1 -
6.3.  Boeing, Engine Manufacturer and Customer shall thereafter
mutually agree on the appropriate corrective action to be taken based on any
such recommendations.  Corrective actions, which involve maintenance
and/or refurbishment, as described in paragraph 6.2, both on-wing and off-wing,
shall be performed at no cost to Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer.
 
6.5                  Improvement Parts and Engine
Refurbishment.
 
 
Following
the completion of any corrective action pursuant to Paragraph 6.4, if subsequent
Basic Data show that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration of
the Covered Aircraft exceeds the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing shall have the
option to provide or cause to be provided to Customer, at no charge, (except
life used on engine parts or parts utilized for maintenance) any airplane drag
improvement parts and/or engine TSFC improvement parts (Improvement
Parts) which, when installed in such Covered Aircraft or engines, would
result in an improvement in the cruise fuel mileage
performance.  Boeing shall provide and/or shall cause Engine
Manufacturer to provide, as appropriate, reimbursement for Customer’s
incorporation of such improvements, corrections, or changes at the warranty
labor rate then in effect between Boeing and Customer or Engine Manufacturer and
Customer, as applicable.  Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer shall give
Customer reasonable advance written notice of the estimated on-dock date at
Customer’s maintenance base for any such Improvement Parts.
 
If Boeing
elects to provide or causes to be provided Improvement Parts for such Covered
Aircraft or engines, then Customer and Boeing shall mutually agree upon the
details of such an Improvement Parts program.  To the extent Boeing
and/or Engine Manufacturer are required to support such a program, such support
shall be provided at no charge to Customer.
 

 

 

 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
If
Customer elects to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft and/or
engines, they shall be incorporated in a timely manner and in accordance with
Boeing and Engine Manufacturer instructions.
 
If
Customer elects not to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft
and/or engines, or if Customer elects not to refurbish an engine which has
exceeded Twenty Four Thousand and Six (24,006) hours since new or Nineteen
Thousand Nine Hundred Eighty Four (19,984) hours since initial or any
subsequent performance refurbishment, and for which Boeing and/or Engine
Manufacturer has recommended refurbishment as part of its recommended corrective
actions, subsequent Basic Data shall be appropriately adjusted by an amount
consistent with the improvement in cruise fuel mileage performance which would
have been realized had such Improvement Parts been incorporated or had such
engine refurbishment been performed; provided, however, any such improvement in
cruise fuel mileage performance shall be reasonably substantiated by Boeing to
Customer.
 




7.  


Payments.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 
7.1                  Annual Excess Fuel Burn
Amount.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].
















8.  


Duplication of
      Benefits




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




9.  


Assignment
      Prohibited.




 
Notwithstanding
any other provisions of the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations
described in this Letter Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of
Customer’s becoming the operator of the Aircraft, and cannot be assigned, in
whole or in part, without the prior written consent of Boeing.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




10.  


Exclusive
      Remedy.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




11.  


Confidential
      Treatment.




 
Customer
understands and agrees that the information contained herein represents
confidential business information and has value precisely because it is not
available generally or to other parties.  Customer agrees to limit the
disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.
 
Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          
 

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to the matters treated above, please indicate your acceptance and
approval.

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this              
day of _____ of 2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By:                                          
 
Its:                                                                         
 
By:                                                                                                      
 
Its:                                                                             



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
A to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page   




 
Determination of Cumulative
Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration
 
For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the “Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration” is the average cruise fuel mileage deterioration of the Covered
Aircraft.  The determination of the Fleet Average Mileage
Deterioration will be based on fuel mileage deterioration of individual Covered
Aircraft relative to their Baseline Performance Level cruise fuel mileage
performance as defined below.
 
1.           Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Program
(APM),
in effect at the time of delivery of the first Covered Aircraft, that shall be
used for data analysis during the Performance Retention Term.  For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Model Reference Level cruise fuel mileage
performance for the Covered Aircraft shall be as set forth in the
APM.
 
2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
4.           The
“Current Deterioration” (expressed as a percentage) for each Covered Aircraft is
the difference between the Current Performance Level and the Baseline
Performance Level.
 
5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
6.           The
“Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration” (expressed as a
percentage) will be determined for each Subsequent Monitoring Period by summing
the Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration values as determined in Paragraph 5
for each calendar month according to the following equation:
 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




 
 




 
      


SEPARATELY
      WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO




 
 




 
      


REQUEST
      FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
 
7.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
B to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page   1




 
Cruise Fuel Mileage
Performance Determination
 
Customer
shall obtain cruise fuel mileage performance data in revenue service using the
Airplane Condition Monitoring System (ACMS).  This data will be
recorded during level flight cruise in steady state conditions.  Data
shall be obtained in accordance with the then current revision of the Airplane
Performance Monitoring Software User Guide (APM User Guide) and shall include
the parameters defined in the airplane model specific appendix during each such
data recording (Data Events).
 
Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Software
for data analysis.  Customer shall reduce and analyze data obtained
from the Data Events.  Such analysis shall be in accordance with the
methods set forth in the APM User Guide.  Customer’s analysis shall
include the determination of the fuel mileage, thrust required and fuel flow
required relative to the Model Reference Level.
 
Customer
will maintain records of factors relating to fuel mileage
deterioration.  These factors will include (a) engine history, cockpit
instrumentation history and airframe history and condition of such Covered
Aircraft, (b) pertinent Covered Aircraft maintenance and operational procedures
used by Customer, (c) drag effects of any post delivery airframe and/or engine
changes incorporated in such Covered Aircraft, (d) sudden shifts in engine EGT
condition monitoring data, and (e) any other relevant factors.
 




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
C to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page    




 
Delivery Schedule for
Covered Aircraft
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      






P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
D to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page    



ANNUAL LIMITATION ADJUSTMENT
EQUATION

 
([CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].)





 (a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].










(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 (c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:










(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].






























 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(iii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









NOTE:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AF
53
ex10138af.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138af.htm






 



 






 


Boeing Commercial Airplanes

P.O. Box 3707 
Seattle , WA 98124-2207 

[Missing Graphic Reference] 







6-1162-TRW-0667

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616
 




Subject:


GENX-1B74/75
      Powered 787-9 Performance Retention
Commitment




 




Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase
      Agreement) between The Boeing Company (Boeing)
      and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer)
      relating to Model 787-923 Aircraft (Aircraft).




 
This
Letter Agreement (Letter
Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement.  All
terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the Purchase Agreement.
 
Boeing
recognizes that performance retention within reasonable limits is essential to
maintain the economy of operation of the Aircraft.  Therefore the
parties hereto agree as follows with respect to performance
retention.
 




1.  


Aircraft
      Commitment.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Covered Aircraft shall be defined as a
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
Boeing
commits to Customer that, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], as
defined in Attachment A, during the Performance Retention Term, as defined in
paragraph 2 below, will not exceed the levels shown in the table below (Aircraft
Commitment).
 




Time
      After Delivery of the First Covered Aircraft


Cumulative
      Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration Commitment (%)



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      



 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 




2.  


Applicability and
      Performance Retention Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




2.1  


Delivery Schedule for
      Covered Aircraft.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, it is anticipated that Boeing will deliver
the Covered Aircraft to Customer in accordance with the following delivery
schedule set forth in Attachment C.  If the fleet size and delivery
schedule is significantly different, the Aircraft Commitment may be
appropriately adjusted to reflect such changes.
 
 




2.2  


Performance Retention
      Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




3.  


Conditions.




 




3.1  


Operation and
      Maintenance.




 
Customer shall operate and maintain
the Covered Aircraft in accordance with Customer’s FAA-approved operations and
maintenance programs.  Customer shall operate and maintain the engines
in accordance with the Operation and Maintenance Manuals and Customer's
Maintenance Program and an Engine Management Program mutually defined and agreed
to by the Engine Manufacturer and Customer.
 




3.2  


Powerback.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.3                  Flight Cycle Utilization and
Derate.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 




4.  


Determination of Fuel
      Mileage Deterioration.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
Following
the delivery of each Covered Aircraft to Customer by Boeing, and continuing
until expiration of the Performance Retention Term, Customer shall record,
analyze, and forward to Boeing cruise fuel mileage data obtained on such Covered
Aircraft as specified in Attachment B (Basic
Data).

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




5.  


Notice of Performance
      Deterioration.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




6.  


Election of
      Actions.




 
Upon
Boeing's receipt of any notice that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration exceeds, or is likely to exceed the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing
and Customer, as appropriate, will take the following actions:
 
[Missing
Graphic
Reference]                                6.1           Data.
 
Boeing
will evaluate the Basic Data.  At its option, Boeing may accomplish
such evaluation by analysis of Customer’s raw ACMS data or by obtaining
additional performance data on such Covered Aircraft in accordance with
Attachment B.  Such additional data may include data acquired during
revenue service with Boeing personnel aboard as observers.  The Basic
Data and any additional data obtained by Boeing in its evaluation shall be
appropriately adjusted to reflect any material changes elected by Customer to
the Covered Aircraft which have occurred subsequent to delivery of the Covered
Aircraft, including any replacement of one or more of the engines installed on a
Covered Aircraft.  Additionally, adjustments will be applied for any
relevant factors as agreed by Customer and Boeing (e.g., inaccuracies in flight
deck instrumentation, a sudden increase in deterioration that is attributed to a
foreign object damage event such as severe hail and the additional rate of
deterioration for Aircraft used for pilot training.)  If Boeing and
Customer are in disagreement as to such evaluation of the Basic Data, such
disagreement shall be resolved by good faith technical negotiation between the
parties including, as necessary, the Engine Manufacturer.
 

 

 

 
6.2                  Surveys.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
6.3                  Weight.
 
Boeing
may request that Customer weigh such Covered Aircraft, in which event Customer
agrees to weigh such Covered Aircraft in conjunction with its normally scheduled
maintenance and will report its findings to Boeing.
 




6.4  


Corrective
      Actions.




 
Boeing shall promptly make such
recommendations to Customer that Boeing believes would result in improvement of
the cruise fuel mileage performance of such Covered Aircraft based on analysis
of the surveys and available data pursuant to Paragraphs 6.1 -
6.3.  Boeing, Engine Manufacturer and Customer shall thereafter
mutually agree on the appropriate corrective action to be taken based on any
such recommendations.  Corrective actions, which involve maintenance
and/or refurbishment, as described in paragraph 6.2, both on-wing and off-wing,
shall be performed at no cost to Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer.
 
6.5                  Improvement Parts and Engine
Refurbishment.
 
 
Following
the completion of any corrective action pursuant to Paragraph 6.4, if subsequent
Basic Data show that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration of
the Covered Aircraft exceeds the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing shall have the
option to provide or cause to be provided to Customer, at no charge, (except
life used on engine parts or parts utilized for maintenance) any airplane drag
improvement parts and/or engine TSFC improvement parts (Improvement
Parts) which, when installed in such Covered Aircraft or engines, would
result in an improvement in the cruise fuel mileage
performance.  Boeing shall provide and/or shall cause Engine
Manufacturer to provide, as appropriate, reimbursement for Customer’s
incorporation of such improvements, corrections, or changes at the warranty
labor rate then in effect between Boeing and Customer or Engine Manufacturer and
Customer, as applicable.  Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer shall give
Customer reasonable advance written notice of the estimated on-dock date at
Customer’s maintenance base for any such Improvement Parts.
 
If Boeing
elects to provide or causes to be provided Improvement Parts for such Covered
Aircraft or engines, then Customer and Boeing shall mutually agree upon the
details of such an Improvement Parts program.  To the extent Boeing
and/or Engine Manufacturer are required to support such a program, such support
shall be provided at no charge to Customer.
 

 

 

 
If
Customer elects to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft and/or
engines, they shall be incorporated in a timely manner and in accordance with
Boeing and Engine Manufacturer instructions.
 
If
Customer elects not to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft
and/or engines, or if Customer elects not to refurbish an engine which has
exceeded Four Thousand Five Hundred Fifteen (4,515) cycles since new or for more
than Three Thousand Three Hundred Ten (3,110) cycles since performance
refurbishment, and for which Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer has recommended
refurbishment as part of its recommended corrective actions, subsequent Basic
Data shall be appropriately adjusted by an amount consistent with the
improvement in cruise fuel mileage performance which would have been realized
had such Improvement Parts been incorporated or had such engine refurbishment
been performed; provided, however, any such improvement in cruise fuel mileage
performance shall be reasonably substantiated by Boeing to
Customer.
 




7.  


Payments.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
7.1                  Annual Excess Fuel Burn
Amount.
 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
7.2                  Credit
Memorandum.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
7.3.                  Credit
Adjustments.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
7.4                  Limitation on Amount of
Credits.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




8.  


Duplication of
      Benefits




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




9.  


Assignment
      Prohibited.




 
Notwithstanding
any other provisions of the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations
described in this Letter Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of
Customer’s becoming the operator of the Aircraft, and cannot be assigned, in
whole or in part, without the prior written consent of Boeing.
 




10.  


Exclusive
      Remedy.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




11.  


Confidential
      Treatment.




 
Customer
understands and agrees that the information contained herein represents
confidential business information and has value precisely because it is not
available generally or to other parties.  Customer agrees to limit the
disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.
 
Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          
 


Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to the matters treated above, please indicate your acceptance and
approval.


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this              
day of _____ of 2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.
 
By:                                                                                                      

Its:                                                                         

By:                                                                                                      
 
Its:                                                                             



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
A to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page   




 
Determination of Cumulative
Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration
 
For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the “Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration” is the average cruise fuel mileage deterioration of the Covered
Aircraft.  The determination of the Fleet Average Mileage
Deterioration will be based on fuel mileage deterioration of individual Covered
Aircraft relative to their Baseline Performance Level cruise fuel mileage
performance as defined below.
 
1.           Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Program
(APM),
in effect at the time of delivery of the first Covered Aircraft, that shall be
used for data analysis during the Performance Retention Term .  For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Model Reference Level cruise fuel mileage
performance for the Covered Aircraft shall be as set forth in the
APM.
 
2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..
 
4.           The
“Current Deterioration” (expressed as a percentage) for each Covered Aircraft is
the difference between the Current Performance Level and the Baseline
Performance Level.
 
5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
6.           The
“Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration” (expressed as a
percentage) will be determined for each Subsequent Monitoring Period by summing
the Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration values as determined in Paragraph 5
for each calendar month according to the following equation:
 
                        m
 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILE




 
 




 
      


SEPARATELY
      WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A




 
 




 
      


REQUEST
      FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
 

 
 
7.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
B to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page   1




 
Cruise Fuel Mileage
Performance Determination
 
Customer
shall obtain cruise fuel mileage performance data in revenue service using the
Airplane Condition Monitoring System (ACMS).  This data will be
recorded during level flight cruise in steady state conditions.  Data
shall be obtained in accordance with the then current revision of the Airplane
Performance Monitoring Software User Guide (APM User Guide) and shall include
the parameters defined in the airplane model specific appendix during each such
data recording (Data Events).
 
Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Software
for data analysis.  Customer shall reduce and analyze data obtained
from the Data Events.  Such analysis shall be in accordance with the
methods set forth in the APM User Guide.  Customer’s analysis shall
include the determination of the fuel mileage, thrust required and fuel flow
required relative to the Model Reference Level.
 
Customer
will maintain records of factors relating to fuel mileage
deterioration.  These factors will include (a) engine history, cockpit
instrumentation history and airframe history and condition of such Covered
Aircraft, (b) pertinent Covered Aircraft maintenance and operational procedures
used by Customer, (c) drag effects of any post delivery airframe and/or engine
changes incorporated in such Covered Aircraft, (d) sudden shifts in engine EGT
condition monitoring data, and (e) any other relevant factors.



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
C to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page           





 
Delivery Schedule for
Covered Aircraft
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      






P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
D to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page    



ANNUAL LIMITATION ADJUSTMENT
EQUATION

 
(CALENDAR
YEARS 2012 AND ON)





 (a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].










(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 (c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:










(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].































 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(iii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









NOTE:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AG
54
ex10138ag.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ag.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
 
6-1162-TRW-0668   Page
2
 



6-1162-TRW-0668


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


Special
      Matters Relating to COTS Software and End User License
      Agreements









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft
(Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

Recitals

A.  Certain
third party, commercial off-the-shelf software products are available to perform
various functions required in the Aircraft (COTS Software).

B.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..

C.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

D.  Therefore,
the parties desire to amend certain provisions of the Purchase Agreement to
properly reflect the respective rights and obligations of the parties with
respect to the COTS Software included in the Aircraft.



P.A. No.
3219
EULA_Special_Matters
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
 
6-1162-TRW-0668   Page
2
 




Agreement

1.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3. Customer
may not transfer, novate or assign its rights under this Letter Agreement or any
rights, terms or obligations hereunder, whether by operation of law, contract or
otherwise, except with the express written consent of Boeing, and such consent
will not be unreasonably withheld.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          





P.A. No.
3219
EULA_Special_Matters
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138H
55
ex10138ah.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ah.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0670
Page




6-1162-TRW-0670


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616


Subject:                      Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787
      aircraft (the Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below, and
amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement. All capitalized terms used herein
but not otherwise defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the Purchase Agreement.

For ease
of reference, a “Table of Contents” has been added as Attachment A to this
Letter Agreement.

1.                AGTA.

1.1           Taxes.

Section 2.2 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:

“2.2           Taxes.

2.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









2.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..

2.2.4             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.2.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2.6                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.2           Customs
Duties.

1.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


























1.2.2                      Boeing
provides the information in the preceding Section 1.2.1 to Customer as a
courtesy, and not in lieu of professional opinions rendered by counsel of
Customer’s choice, subject to the limitations that Boeing assumes no
responsibility for the accuracy or timeliness of such information, and that
Customer agrees it will assert no claim against Boeing based on such
information.

1.3           Rate of
Interest.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.4           Advanced Payment
Increases.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.5           FAA Manufacturer
Changes.

Section 3.2.2 of the AGTA is replaced
in full by the following new provision:
“3.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”



















1.6           FAA Operator
Changes.

Section 3.3.2 of the AGTA is replaced
in full by the following new Section 3.3.2:
“3.3.2                      Cost of Operator
Changes.

3.3.2.1                    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

























(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3.2.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].,

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”





1.7


Development Change and
      Manufacturer Change Production Revision
  Records.





[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].














1.8           Part 121 Compliance
Review.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.9           Condition of Aircraft
Suffering Damage.

The AGTA is amended by adding the
following new Section 5.6 after Section 5.5 of the AGTA.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”
.”

1.10           Target Delivery
Dates.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.11           Customer Delay in Acceptance
of Aircraft.

Section 6.4 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:
           “[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.12           Customer Delay Due to Allied
Pilots Association Strike.

The following new Section 6.5 is added
to the AGTA after Section 6.4:

“6.5           Customer Delay Due to Allied
Pilots Association Strike.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

6.5.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

6.5.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

6.5.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

1.13           Liquidated Damages and Right
of Termination.

1.13.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].














[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.13.3                 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.13.4                 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.14           Notice to Customer in the
Event of an Excusable Delay.

Section 7.2 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:
“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”


1.15           Aircraft Damaged Beyond
Repair.





















Section
7.5 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“7.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

1.16           Termination.

Section 7.6 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.17           Excusable
Delay.

The AGTA is amended by adding the
following provision immediately following Section 7.7:


















“7.8                  Section
7.5 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“7.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

1.18           Risk
Allocation/Insurance.

1.18.1                      Article
8 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provisions:

“Article
8.                                Risk
Allocation/Insurance.

8.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


8.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


8.1.2             Boeing
Insurance.

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
.

8.1.3             Definition of
Customer.  For the purpose of Section 8.1, the term “Customer”
includes American Airlines, Inc., its divisions, any wholly-owned subsidiary of
American Airlines, Inc. which is assigned any rights or delegated any duties as
permitted under the applicable Purchase Agreement, the permitted assignees under
the applicable Purchase Agreement, and their respective directors, officers and
employees.

8.2                  Title and Risk with
Customer.

8.2.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


8.2.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]





















 


8.2.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



8.2.4                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


8.2.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
8.2.6             Definition of
Boeing.  For purposes of this Article 8.2, the term “Boeing”
includes The Boeing Company, its divisions, any wholly-owned subsidiary of The
Boeing Company which is assigned any rights or obligations in accordance with
Section 9.1 of the AGTA, the permitted assignees under the applicable Purchase
Agreement, provided that such assignees or subsidiaries have performed services
under the Customer Support Document to the AGTA and Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to
the Purchase Agreement, and their respective directors, officers and
employees.”



















1.18.2                      The
insurance certificate provided by Boeing pursuant to Section 8.1.2(c) of the
AGTA (as amended by this Letter Agreement) shall be substantially in the form of
the certificate attached to this Letter Agreement as Attachment B.



1.19           Alteon Interface
Commitment.

1.19.1                  Section
9.1.5 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new
provisions:

“9.1.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

9.1.5.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


9.1.5.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





















1.20           Exculpatory Clause in
Post-Delivery Sale or Lease.

Section 9.7 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:

“9.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
”

1.21           Termination for Certain
Events.

1.21.1                      Article
10 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“Article
10.                                Termination for Certain
Events.

10.1           Termination.  If
either party:

(i)  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(ii)  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

















10.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.22           FAA
Grounding.

1.22.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



1.22.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


1.23           FAA ETOPS
Prevention.

































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


1.24           Duplicate
Remedies.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]



2.           Line Station Spare Parts
Support.

Customer, at its option, may
participate in the use of spare parts held by Boeing at any line station in
accordance with the reasonable terms and conditions set forth by Boeing for such
participation.



























3.           Product Assurance (Exhibit
C).

3.1           Disclaimer and Release;
Exclusion of Liabilities.

Section 11 of Part 2 of the Product
Assurance Document is replaced in full by the following new
provision:

“11.           Disclaimer and Release;
Exclusion of Liabilities.

11.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






 
      


(A)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]










 
      


(B)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]










 
      


(C)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




















(D)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


11.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
.

11.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


11.4           Definitions.  For
the purpose of this Section 11, “BOEING” or “Boeing” is defined as The Boeing
Company, its divisions, subsidiaries, Affiliates, the assignees of each, and
their respective directors, officers, employees and agents.”

3.2           Reimbursement for Service
Bulletin Corrections.

Section 7.3.2 of Part 2 of the Product
Assurance Document is replaced in full by the following provision:

“7.3.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





(a)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND




FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]






(b)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND




FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]








3.3           FAR 145
Requirements.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


3.4           Warranty Claim, Response and
Payment Time.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


3.5           Maximum
Reimbursement.

The following provision is added to the
end of Section 4.5 of Part 2 to the Product Assurance Document:



























“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

3.6           Additional Service Life
Policy Covered Components.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

3.6.1                  Additional Service Life
Policy Covered Components.

3.6.1.1                      For
purposes of Part 3 of the Product Assurance Document, the following additional
items (Additional SLP Components) shall be deemed to be “SLP Components”, as
defined in Section 1 of Part 3 of the Product Assurance Document:

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.6.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]














3.6.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

 

3.6.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]
.

3.6.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]








(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


























(ii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







 
      


(iii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






3.7           Conditions and Limitations
to the Service Life Policy.

3.7.1                      The
following Section 4.5 is added to Part 3 of the Product Assurance
Document:

“4.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

3.7.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





3.8


Boeing Back-Up of
      Supplier Turnaround Time
Commitments.

















[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


3.9           Supplier Warranty
Commitment.

Section 1 of Part 4 of the Product
Assurance Document is replaced in full by the following new Section
1:

“1.           Supplier Warranties and
Supplier Patent Indemnities.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”

3.10           Engine/Airframe Interface
Commitment.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].
























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

(b)                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(c)                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




 
      


.





3.11           Boeing Indemnities Against
Patent and Copyright Infringement.

Part 6 of the Product Assurance
Document is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“PRODUCT
ASSURANCE DOCUMENT

PART
6:                      BOEING
INDEMNITIES AGAINST PATENT AND COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT AND TRADE SECRET
MISAPPROPRIATION

1.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:







(a)           
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.           Indemnity Against Copyright
Infringement.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]
:

(a)           
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Indemnity Against Trade
Secret Misappropriation.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.           Exceptions, Limitations and
Conditions.

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













4.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


4.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


4.8           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



























4.9           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.10           For
the purposes of this Part 6, “BOEING” or “Boeing” is defined as The Boeing
Company, its divisions, wholly owned subsidiaries, the permitted assignees of
each, and their respective directors, officers, employees and
agents.

4.11           
For the purposes of this Part 6, “Customer” is defined as American Airlines,
Inc., its divisions, wholly owned subsidiaries, the permitted assignees of each,
and their respective directors, officers, employees and agents.”




4.           Performance.

4.1           Performance Guarantees/Data
Base Changes.

4.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





















4.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






















(d)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.4                      Upon
the occurrence of any performance data base change, Boeing agrees to take the
following action:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(d)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






















(e)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.6                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]




























[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
























5.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.           Assignment.

This
Letter Agreement is being provided to Customer as an accommodation and cannot be
assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of
Boeing.
























7.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement or the applicable Purchase
Agreement.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                                              

Its                                                              

Attachment
A - Table of Contents
Attachment
B - Form of Insurance Certificate of Boeing



P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-TRW-670
Page  





Table
of Contents

Subject                                                                               Paragraph
 

 
1.      AGTA
 
Taxes
(Art.
2)                                                                                           1.1
 
Customs
Duties (Art.
2)                                                                                                     1.2
 
Rate of
Interest (Art.
2)                                                                                           1.3
 
Advanced
Payment Increases (Art.
2)                                                                                                                1.4
 
FAA
Manufacturer Changes (Art.
3)                                                                                                                1.5
 
FAA
Operator Changes (Art.
3)                                                                                                     1.6
 
Development
Change and Manufacturer Change Production
 
Revision
Records (Art.
4)                                                                                                     1.7
 
Part 121
Compliance Review (Art.
4)                                                                                                                1.8
 
Condition
of Aircraft Suffering Damage (Art. 5)1.9
 
Target
Delivery Dates (Art.
6)                                                                                                     1.10
 
Customer
Delay in Acceptance of Aircraft (Art.
6)                                                                                                                1.11
 
Customer
Delay Due to Allied Pilots Association Strike (Art. 6)1.12
 
Liquidated
Damages and Right of Termination (Art. 7)1.13
 
Notice to
Customer in the Event of an Excusable Delay (Art. 7)1.14
 
Aircraft
Damaged Beyond Repair (Art.
7)                                                                                                                1.15
 
Termination
(Art.
7)                                                                                           1.16
 
Excusable
Delay (Art.
7)                                                                                                     1.17
 
Risk
Allocation/Insurance (Art.
8)                                                                                                     1.18
 
Alteon
Interface Commitment (Art
9)                                                                                                                1.19
 
Exculpatory
Clause in Post-Delivery Sale or Lease (Art. 9)1.20
 
Termination
for Certain Events (Art.
10)                                                                                                                1.21
 
FAA
Grounding                                                                                           1.22
 
FAA ETOPS
Prevention                                                                                                     1.23
 
Duplicate
Remedies                                                                                           1.24
 

 
2.      Line Station Spare Parts
Support
 

 

 
3.      Product Assurance (Exhibit
C)
 
Disclaimer
and Release; Exclusion of Liabilities (Part 2)3.1
 
Reimbursement
for Service Bulletin Corrections (Part 2)3.2
 
FAR 145
Requirements (Part
2)                                                                                                     3.3
 
Warranty
Claim, Response and Payment Time (Part 2)3.4
 
Maximum
Reimbursement (Part
2)                                                                                                                3.5
 
Additional
Service Life Policy Covered Components (Part 3)3.6
 
Conditions
and Limitations to the Service Life Policy (Part 3)3.7
 
Boeing
Back-Up of Supplier Turnaround Time3.8
 
Commitments
(Part 4)
 
Supplier
Warranty Commitment (Part
4)                                                                                                                3.9
 
Engine/Airframe
Interface Commitment (Part 5)3.10
 
Boeing
Indemnities Against Patent and
Copyright                                                                                                                3.11
 
Infringement
(Part 6)
 

 
4.      Performance
 
Performance
Guarantees/Data Base
Changes                                                                                                                4.1
 

 
5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

 

 
6.  Assignment
 

 
7.  Confidential
Treatment
 



P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 




Sample
Insurance Certificate (Boeing)


BROKER’S  LETTERHEAD


[ date
]

Certificate
of Insurance Ref.
No.                                                                           


THIS
IS TO CERTIFY TO:





 
      


American
      Airlines, Inc. (hereinafter
“American”)








 
      


P.O.
      Box 619616








 
      


Dallas-Fort
      Worth Airport,
Texas  75261-9616






that
Insurers, EACH FOR HIS OWN PART AND NOT ONE FOR THE OTHER, are providing the
following insurance:





NAMED
      INSURED:


The
      Boeing Company (hereinafter
“Boeing”)









ADDRESS
      OF INSURED:


Post
      Office Box 3707








 
      


Seattle,
      Washington 98124-2207









PERIOD
      OF INSURANCE:


See
      attached Schedule of Insurers









GEOGRAPHICAL
      LIMITS:


Worldwide









EQUIPMENT
      INSURED:


All
      Boeing [model] [type] aircraft owned or operated by American that are the
      subject of that certain Purchase Agreement No._______ dated _______, 20xx
      between American and Boeing, as more particularly described on the
      attached Schedule of Aircraft, as such schedule may be amended from time
      to time.








P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      


DESCRIPTION OF
      COVERAGES









A. AIRCRAFT HULL
      INSURANCE


All
      risks of ground and flight physical damage coverage in respect of all
      aircraft owned by, leased to or operated by the Named Insured, including
      the Aircraft and any engines (including the Engines) and any parts
      (including the Parts) while attached to any such Aircraft or removed
      therefrom but not replaced, subject to policy terms, conditions,
      limitations, exclusions and
deductibles.









Amount of
      Insurance:


Agreed
      Value (as per Policy terms and
conditions).









B. AIRCRAFT LIABILITY
      INSURANCE


Aircraft
      Liability Insurance, including Bodily Injury (including passengers),
      Property Damage, Aircraft Liability, Passenger Legal Liability,
      Premises/Operations Liability, Personal Injury, and Contractual Liability
      Insurance, subject to policy terms, conditions, limitations, exclusion and
      deductibles.









Limit of
      Liability:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


.








P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 



SPECIAL
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE ADDRESSEE(S)


Subject
to the policy terms, conditions, limitations, exclusions and deductibles and
solely with respect to Purchase Agreement No._____ dated as of _____, 1997 (the
“Purchase Agreement”) between American and The Boeing Company (“Boeing”), the
policies set forth in the attached Schedule of Insurers are amended to include
the following:





1.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, American is included as an
      additional Insured, but only to the extent that Boeing is obligated by its
      agreements to indemnify and hold harmless American under Section 8.1.1 of
      the Aircraft General Terms Agreement, AGTA-AAL, applicable to the Purchase
      Agreement and then only to the extent of coverage provided by the
      policy;









2.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Hull Insurance, each Insurer agrees to waive any
      rights of subrogation against American to the extent that Boeing has
      waived such rights by the terms of its agreements to indemnify American
      pursuant to the Purchase Agreement;









3.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, to the extent American is
      insured hereunder, such insurance shall not be invalidated or minimized by
      any action or inaction, omission or misrepresentation by the Insured
      regardless of any breach or violation of any warranty, declaration or
      condition contained in such
policies;









4.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, to provide that all
      provisions of the insurance coverages referenced above, except the limits
      of liability, will operate to give each Insured or additional insured the
      same protection as if there were a separate Policy issue to
      each;









5.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, such insurance will be
      primary and not contributory nor excess with respect to any other
      insurance available for the protection of American, but only to the extent
      that Boeing is obligated by its agreements to indemnify and hold harmless
      American under Section 8.1.1 of the Aircraft General Terms Agreement,
      AGTA-AAL, applicable to the Purchase Agreement and then only to the extent
      of coverage provided by the policy;









6.


Each
      of the Aircraft Liability Insurance policy and Aircraft Hull Insurance
      policy provides that:  American shall not have any obligation or
      liability for premiums, commissions, calls or assessments in connection
      with such insurance;









7.


With
      respect to the Aircraft Liability Insurance, if a policy is canceled for
      any reason whatsoever, any substantial change is made which would reduce
      the amount of coverage as certified herein, or if a policy is allowed to
      lapse for nonpayment of premium, such cancellation, change or lapse shall
      not be effective as to American for thirty (30) days after receipt by
      American of written notice from the Insurers or their authorized
      representatives or Broker of such cancellation, change or lapse;
      and









8.


For
      the purposes of the Certificate, “American” is defined as American
      Airlines, Inc., its divisions, any wholly-owned subsidiary of American
      Airlines, Inc. which is assigned any rights or obligations in accordance
      with Article 9.1 of the AGTA, the assignees of each permitted under the
      applicable Purchase Agreement, and their respective directors, officers
      and employees.







P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      


THE
      BOEING COMPANY








 
      


AND
      ALL ITS SUBSIDIARIES









 
      


SCHEDULE
      OF SUBSCRIBING INSURERS








 
      


POLICY
      TERM:  DECEMBER 1, 1996 TO DECEMBER 1,
  1997










 
      


COVERAGES:









 
      


Aircraft
      Hull and Liability Insurance










 
      


POLICY




SUBSCRIBING INSURERS FOR
100% PARTICIPATIONNUMBER









 
      


SEVERAL LIABILITY
      NOTICE






The
subscribing insurers’ obligations under contracts of insurance to which they
subscribe are several and not joint and are limited solely to the extent of
their individual subscriptions.  The subscribing insurers are not
responsible for the subscription of any co-subscribing insurer who for any
reason does not satisfy all or part of its obligation.




P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 




Subject
to the terms, conditions, limitations and exclusions of the relative policies
except for the specific declarations contained in this certificate.


(signature)

(typed
name)

(title)




P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 






EX-10.138AI
56
ex10138ai.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ai.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0672
Page
3



6-1162-TRW-0672


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Promotional
Support Agreement






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft
(Aircraft).






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.


Recital.

Boeing
and Customer wish to enter into an agreement pursuant to which each party will
contribute equally to promotional programs in support of the entry into
Customer’s service of the Aircraft as more specifically provided
below.

Agreement.

1.           Definitions.

1.1           “Covered
Aircraft” shall mean those Aircraft identified on Table 1 to the Purchase
Agreement as of the date of signing of this Letter Agreement and any Substitute
Aircraft.

1.2           “Promotional
Support” shall mean marketing and promotion programs in support of the entry
into Customer service of the Covered Aircraft such as marketing research,
tourism development, corporate identity, direct marketing, video tape or still
photography, planning, design and production of collateral materials, management
of promotion programs, advertising campaigns or such other marketing and
promotional activities as the parties may mutually agree.

1.3           “[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.4           “Performance
Period” [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.5           “Qualifying
Third Party Fees” shall mean [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           Commitment.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


3.           Methods of
Performance.

Subject
to the Commitment Limit, Customer may elect to receive the Promotional Support
in either or any combination of the following ways:

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.           Commencement
Date.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.           Project
Approval.

Following
the execution of this Letter Agreement, a Boeing Airline Marketing Services
representative will meet with Customer’s designated representative to review and
approve the extent, selection, scheduling, and funds disbursement process for
the Promotional Support to be provided pursuant to this Letter
Agreement.

6.           Confidential
Treatment.                                                      Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement or in the Purchase Agreement.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                           

Its            Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                             ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                                                                     

Its                                                                                    



P.A. No.
3219
Promotional_Support_Agreement Rev.:
2/07/06

BOEING
PROPRIETARY 

 



 






 






EX-10.138AJ
57
ex10138aj.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138aj.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0673
Page 6



6-1162-TRW-0673


American
Airlines, Inc.
P. O. Box
619616
Dallas/Ft.
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


Confidentiality









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc.
      relating to Model 787-923 Aircraft






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below and amends
and supplements the Purchase Agreement referenced above. All capitalized terms
used herein but not otherwise defined in this Letter Agreement shall have the
same meanings assigned thereto in Exhibit C to the Purchase Agreement or
elsewhere in such Purchase Agreement.

1.           Confidentiality
Obligation.

1.1           Except
as otherwise provided in this Letter Agreement, each party shall, and shall
ensure that its directors, officers, employees, Affiliates, agents, suppliers,
subcontractors and professional advisors (collectively, Representatives), at all
times, maintain strict confidence and secrecy in respect of all Confidential
Information (as defined below). Each party agrees to disclose Confidential
Information only to such of its Representatives as is required for the purpose
of implementing and administering the Purchase Agreement, and shall inform such
Representatives of the confidential nature of the Confidential Information and
instruct (and use best reasonable efforts to cause) such Representatives to
treat such Confidential Information in a manner consistent with this Section
1.

1.2           Neither
party shall use the Confidential Information for any purpose (including any
competitive or commercial purpose) other than in connection with the Purchase
Agreement and for purposes of consummating the transactions contemplated
thereby.

2.           Definition of Confidential
Information.

2.1           Subject
to the provisions of Section 2.2, "Confidential Information" means:

2.1.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

2.1.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





 
      


a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





2.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





 
      


a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
  COMMISSION




         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
d)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
e)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
f)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
g)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
h)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
       PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];




i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




j)      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
          COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
k)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
l)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
        PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
m)  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
        PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
n)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
o)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
              PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
p)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
       PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
q)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
        PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
     r)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
               PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];




s)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


t)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


u)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


v)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


w)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


x)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


y)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


z)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


aa)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


bb)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





2.2           The
following shall not constitute "Confidential Information" for purposes of this
Letter Agreement:

2.2.1                      Information
(other than the terms and conditions of the Pre-Closing Letters and the Business
Letters) already in a party's possession prior to its disclosure by the other
party as evidenced by the written or electronic records of such
party;

2.2.2                      Information
obtained from a third person or entity that is not prohibited from disclosing
such information to the receiving party as a result of a contractual, legal or
fiduciary obligation to the party whose information is being
disclosed;

2.2.3                      Information
that is or becomes generally available to the public, other than as a result of
disclosure by a party in violation of this Letter Agreement; or

2.2.4                      Information
that has been or is independently developed by a party or its Affiliates,
without violating such party’s obligations under this Letter
Agreement.

2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Disclosure.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





(a)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

(A)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




 
      


;





(B)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

(C)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(D)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




 
      


.









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


.





3.2             Either
party may disclose Confidential Information without the consent of the other
party when and to the extent required by any law applicable to such party or by
a Governmental Authority. If a party (the "Disclosing Party") is requested to
disclose any Confidential Information of the other party (the "Affected Party")
under the terms of a subpoena or order issued by a Governmental Authority, it
shall (i) notify the Affected Party immediately of the existence, terms and
circumstances surrounding such request, (ii) consult with the Affected Party on
the advisability of taking legally available steps to resist or narrow such
request, and (iii) if any disclosure of Confidential Information is required to
prevent the Disclosing Party from being held in contempt or subject to other
legal penalty, furnish only such portion of the Confidential Information as it
is legally compelled to disclose and, at the request of the Affected Party, use
commercially reasonable efforts to assist the Affected Party in obtaining an
order or other reliable assurance that confidential treatment shall be accorded
to the disclosed Confidential Information; and

3.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.4           In
addition to disclosures of Confidential Information permitted by this Letter
Agreement, either party may disclose Confidential Information as and to the
extent explicitly provided for in the Purchase Agreement.

4.           Remedies.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








5.           Conflicts.

Subject to Section 2.3, to the extent
of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Letter Agreement
and any provisions regarding confidentiality of information set forth in the
Purchase Agreements, the provisions of this Letter Agreement shall, to the
extent of such conflict or inconsistency, control.

6.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer and Boeing understand that
certain commercial and financial information contained in this Letter Agreement
are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential. Customer and Boeing agree
that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the information contained herein
as confidential and will not, without the prior written consent of the other,
disclose this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein to any other
person or entity, except as provided in this Letter Agreement or in the
applicable Purchase Agreement.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY



By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.



By                                                              

Its                                                              





P.A. No.
3219
Confidentiality
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AK
58
ex10138ak.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ak.htm






 



 






 



6-1162-TRW-0674


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616



Subject:                      Business
Considerations





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (Aircraft) and 787-323 and 787-823 Substitute
      Aircraft (each Substitute Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement. All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same
meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           Basic Credit – Firm
Aircraft.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



2.           Simulator
Package [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].







3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.           
Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement and or the Purchase Agreement.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          





 
      


Its                                          







P.A. No.
3219                                                                                                                     

Business
Considerations 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AL
59
ex10138al.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138al.htm






 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments
















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-1F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 1


 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-1F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 2



 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-1F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 3


 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-2F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 1



 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-2F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 2



 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-2F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 3



 



 






 






EX-10.142
60
ex10142.htm
LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex10142.htm






 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
 
1998
LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
 
AS
AMENDED
 
SECTION
1.                                Purpose,
Definitions.
 
The
purpose of the AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended hereby
(the “Plan”) is to enable AMR Corporation (the “Company”) to attract, retain and
reward key employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates, and
strengthen the mutuality of interests between such key employees and the
Company's shareholders, by offering such key employees performance-based stock
incentives and/or other equity interests or equity-based incentives in the
Company, as well as performance-based incentives payable in
cash.  Since the adoption of this Plan, section 409A of the Code (as
defined below) has been enacted, and requires revision of the Plan document, as
well as do various awards issued thereunder.  The effective date of
this amendment shall be January 1, 2005.
 
For
purposes of the Plan, the following terms shall be defined as set forth
below:
 
(a)           “Affiliate”
means any entity other than the Company and its Subsidiaries that is designated
by the Board as a participating employer under the Plan, provided that the
Company directly or indirectly owns at least twenty percent (20%) of the
combined voting power of all classes of stock of such entity or at least twenty
percent (20%) of the ownership interests in such entity.
 
(b)           “Board”
means the Board of Directors of the Company.
 
(c)           “Book
Value” means, as of any given date, on a per share basis (i) the Stockholders'
Equity in the Company as of the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year as
reflected in the Company's audited consolidated balance sheet, subject to such
adjustments as the Committee shall specify, divided by (ii) the number of then
outstanding shares of Stock as of such year-end date (as adjusted by the
Committee for subsequent events).
 
(d)           “Cause”
means a felony conviction of a participant or the failure of a participant to
contest prosecution for a felony, or a participant's willful misconduct or
dishonesty, any of which is directly and materially harmful to the business or
reputation of the Company or any Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
(e)           “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, and any
successor thereto.
 
(f)           “Committee”
means the Committee referred to in Section 2 of the Plan. If at any time no
Committee shall be in office, then the functions of the Committee specified in
the Plan shall be exercised by the Board.
 
(g)           “Company”
means AMR Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Delaware, or any successor corporation.
 
(h)           “Deferred
Stock” means the right to receive Stock at the end of a specified deferral
period pursuant to Section 8.
 
(i)           “Disability”,
for awards not subject to section 409A of the Code, means disability as
determined under procedures established by the Committee for purposes of this
Plan.  For awards subject to section 409A, "Disability" shall have the
meaning given in section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Code; determination of such
Disability shall be made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor guidance thereto.
 
(j)           “Early
Retirement” means retirement, with the express consent for purposes of this Plan
of the Company at or before the time of such retirement, from active employment
with the Company and any Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
(k)           “Exchange
Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time,
and any successor thereto.
 
(1)           “Fair
Market Value” means, as of any given date, unless otherwise determined by the
Committee in good faith, the mean between the highest and lowest quoted selling
price, regular way, of the Stock on the New York Stock Exchange or, if no such
sale of Stock occurs on the New York Stock Exchange on such date, the fair
market value of the Stock as determined by the Committee in good faith;
provided, that, for Stock Options, Stock Appreciation Rights, Deferred Stock,
Restricted Stock, Performance Related Awards and Other Stock Based Awards
granted or exercised on or after November 16, 2006, fair market value means,
unless otherwise determined by the Committee in good faith, the last sale price
of the Stock on the New York Stock Exchange at the time of such grant or
exercise, as applicable or, if no such sale of Stock occurs on the New York
Stock Exchange on such date or the prior business day, the fair market value of
the Stock as determined by the Committee in good faith.
 
(m)           “Incentive
Stock Option” means any Stock Option intended to be and designated as an
“Incentive Stock Option” within the meaning of section 422 of the
Code.
 
(n)           “Non-Qualified
Stock Option” means any Stock Option that is not an Incentive Stock
Option.
 
(o)           “Normal
Retirement” means retirement from active employment with the Company and any
Subsidiary or Affiliate pursuant to the applicable retirement provisions of the
applicable pension plan of such entity.
 
(p)           “Other
Stock Based Award” means an award under Section 9 below that is valued in whole
or in part by reference to, or is otherwise based on, Stock.
 
(q)           “Performance
Related Awards” means an award made pursuant to Section 9 of Restricted Stock or
Deferred Stock or Other Stock Based Awards upon the determination by the
Committee that performance objectives established by the Committee have been
attained, in whole or in part.
 
(r)           “Plan”
means this AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan as amended, and as it
may be amended hereafter from time to time.
 
(s)           “Restricted
Stock” means shares of Stock that are subject to restrictions under Section 7
below.
 
(t)           “Retirement”
means Normal or Early Retirement.
 
(u)           “Stock”
means the Common Stock, $1.00 par value per share, of the Company.
 
(v)           “Stock
Appreciation Right” means the right pursuant to an award granted under Section 6
below which entitles the grantee to receive, upon the exercise thereof in whole
or in part, an amount in shares of Stock equal in value to the excess of the
Fair Market Value (at the time of exercise) of one share of Stock over the base
price per share specified with respect to the Stock Appreciation Right,
multiplied by the number of shares in respect of which the Stock Appreciation
Right shall have been exercised. The number of shares to be issued shall be
calculated on the basis of the Fair Market Value of the shares at the time of
exercise, with any fractional share being payable in cash based on the Fair
Market Value at the time of exercise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Committee may elect, at any time and from time to time, in lieu of issuing all
or any portion of the shares of Stock otherwise issuable upon any exercise of
any such Stock Appreciation Right, to pay the grantee an amount in cash or other
marketable property with a value equivalent to the aggregate Fair Market Value
at the time of exercise of the number of shares of Stock that the Committee is
electing to settle in cash or other marketable property.
 
(w)           “Stock
Option” or “Option” means any option to purchase shares of Stock (including
Restricted Stock and Deferred Stock, if the Committee so determines) granted
pursuant to Section 5 below.
 
(x)           “Subsidiary”
means any corporation (other than the Company) in an unbroken chain of
corporations beginning with the Company if each of the corporations (other than
the last corporation in the unbroken chain) owns stock possessing fifty percent
(50%) or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock in one
of the other corporations in the chain.
 
In
addition, the terms “LTIP Awards,” “Performance Award”, “Performance Criteria”,
“Change in Control” “Potential Change in Control and “Change in Control Price”
shall have the meanings set forth, respectively, in Sections 2, 10(a), and
Section 11 below.
 
SECTION
2.                                Administration.
 
The Plan
shall be administered by a committee of not less than two members of the Board,
who shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the Board. In selecting
the members of the Committee, the Board shall take into account the requirements
for the members of the Committee to be treated as “Outside Directors” within the
meaning of section 162(m) of the Code and “Non-Employee Directors” for purposes
of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated under section 16 of the Exchange Act. The
functions of the Committee specified in the Plan shall be exercised by the
Board, if and to the extent that no Committee exists which has the authority to
so administer the Plan, or to the extent that the Committee is not comprised
solely of Non-Employee Directors for purposes of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated
under section 16 of the Exchange Act.
 
The
Committee shall have full authority to grant, pursuant to the terms of the Plan,
to officers and other key employees eligible under Section 4: (i) Stock Options
and Incentive Stock Options; (ii) Stock Appreciation Rights; (iii) Restricted
Stock; (iv) Deferred Stock; (v) Other Stock Based Awards; and/or (vi)
Performance Related Awards (collectively, the “LTIP Awards”).
 
In
particular the Committee shall have the authority:
 
(a)           to
select the officers and other key employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries
and Affiliates to whom LTIP Awards may from time to time be granted
hereunder;
 
(b)           to
determine whether and to what extent LTIP Awards, or any combination thereof,
are to be granted hereunder to one or more eligible employees;
 
(c)           subject
to the provisions of Sections 3, 5 and 10, to determine the number of shares to
be covered by each such award granted hereunder;
 
(d)           to
determine the terms and conditions, not inconsistent with the terms of the Plan,
of any award granted hereunder (including, but not limited to, the share price
and any restriction or limitation, or any vesting acceleration or waiver of
forfeiture restrictions regarding any Stock Option or other award and/or the
shares of Stock relating thereto, based in each case on such factors as the
Committee shall determine in its sole discretion);
 
(e)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances a Stock Option
may be settled in cash, Stock Appreciation Rights and/or Restricted Stock under
Section 5(k) or 5(1), as applicable, instead of Stock;
 
(f)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances an award of
Restricted Stock or Deferred Stock may be settled in cash;
 
(g)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Option grants
and/or other awards under the Plan and/or other cash awards made by the Company
are to be made, and operate, on a tandem basis vis-a-vis other awards under the
Plan and/or cash awards made outside of the Plan, or on an additive
basis;
 
(h)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Stock and other
amounts payable with respect to an award under this Plan may be deferred either
automatically or at the election of the participant (including providing for and
determining the amount (if any) of any deemed earnings on any deferred amount
during any deferral period); provided that any such deferral may be accomplished
only if exempt from, or in accordance with, section 409A of the
Code;
 
(i)           with
respect to an award of Restricted Stock, to determine whether the right to vote
will be granted with such award and/or whether any dividends declared with
respect to such award will be paid in cash, additional Restricted Stock, Other
Stock Based Awards, or not at all;
 
(j)           with
respect to an award of Deferred Stock, to determine whether any dividends
declared with respect to such award will be paid in cash, Restricted Stock,
additional Deferred Stock, Other Stock Based Awards, or not at all;
and
 
(k)           to
determine the terms and conditions pursuant to which an LTIP Award may vest on a
pro rata basis or be terminated.
 
The
Committee shall have the authority: to adopt, alter and repeal such rules,
guidelines and practices governing the Plan as it shall, from time to time, deem
advisable; to interpret the terms and provisions of the Plan and any award
issued under the Plan (and any agreements relating thereto); and to otherwise
supervise the administration of the Plan.
 
The
Committee may appoint in writing such person or persons as it may deem necessary
or desirable to carry out any of the duties and responsibilities of the
Committee hereunder and may delegate to such person or persons in writing such
duties, and confer upon such person or persons in writing, such powers,
discretionary or otherwise, as the Committee may deem appropriate. The Committee
may authorize from time to time the Chief Executive Officer and/or another
officer or officers of the Company or its Subsidiaries or Affiliates or a
subcommittee of members of the Committee to grant awards under this Plan to
officers and other key employees of the Company or its Subsidiaries or
Affiliates authorized or approved by the Committee (including grants of
individual awards to officers and other key employees authorized or approved by
the Committee in a pool of awards for a group of officers and/or other key
employees), subject to any conditions or limitations as the Committee may
establish; provided
that all awards to executive officers of the Company shall be approved by
the Committee, or a subcommittee thereof.
 
All
decisions made by the Committee pursuant to the provisions of the Plan shall be
made in the Committee's sole discretion and shall be final and binding on all
persons, including the Company and Plan participants.  Section 409A of
the Code applies to certain awards under this Plan, and it is intended that all
such awards shall be issued, administered, exercised and paid or transferred in
conformance therewith.  Accordingly, notwithstanding anything in
Section 12 to the contrary, the Committee shall have authority to amend or
restate the terms of a grant or award to preclude violation of section 409A of
the Code, without the consent of the recipient thereof.
 
SECTION
3.                                Stock
Subject to Plan.
 
The total
number of shares of Stock reserved and available for distribution under the Plan
shall be 5,000,000 shares, plus any shares remaining available for issuance
under the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, as of the Effective Date
hereof.  Such shares may consist, in whole or in part, of authorized
and unissued shares or treasury shares.
 
Subject
to Section 6(b)(iv) below, if any shares of Stock that have been optioned cease
to be subject to a Stock Option, or if any such shares of Stock that are subject
to any Restricted Stock or Deferred Stock Award, Other Stock Based Award or
Performance Related Award granted hereunder or granted under the 1988 Long Term
Incentive Plan, as amended, are forfeited or any such award otherwise terminates
without a payment being made to the participant in the form of Stock such shares
shall again be available for distribution in connection with future awards under
the Plan.
 
In the
event of any merger, reorganization, consolidation, recapitalization, stock
dividend, stock split or other change in corporate structure affecting the
Stock, such substitution or adjustment shall be made in the aggregate number of
shares reserved for issuance under the Plan, in the number and option price of
shares subject to outstanding Options granted under the Plan, and in the number
of shares subject to other outstanding awards granted under the Plan as may be
determined to be appropriate by the Committee, in its sole discretion, provided
that the number of shares subject to any award shall always be a whole number.
Such adjusted option price shall also be used to determine the amount payable by
the Company upon the exercise of any Stock Appreciation Right associated with
any Stock Option.
 
SECTION
4.                                Eligibility.
 
Officers
and other key employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates (but
excluding members of the Committee and any person who serves only as a director)
who are responsible for, or contribute to, the management, growth and/or
profitability of the business of the Company and/or its Subsidiaries and
Affiliates are eligible for awards under the Plan.
 
SECTION 5.                                Stock Options.
 
Stock
Options may be granted alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other awards
granted under the Plan.  Any Stock Option granted under the Plan shall
be in such form as the Committee may from time to time approve.
 
Stock
Options granted under the Plan may be of two types: (i) Incentive Stock Options;
and (ii) Non-Qualified Stock Options.
 
The
Committee shall have the authority to grant to any optionee Incentive Stock
Options, Non-Qualified Stock Options, or both types of Stock Options (in each
case with or without Stock Appreciation Rights); provided that, in no event
shall the number of shares of Stock subject to any Stock Options granted to any
employee during any calendar year exceed 250,000 shares, as such number may be
adjusted pursuant to Section 3.
 
Options
granted under the Plan shall be subject to the following terms and conditions
and shall contain such additional terms and conditions, not inconsistent with
the terms of the Plan, as the Committee shall deem desirable:
 
(a)           Option Price. The option
price per share of Stock purchasable under a Stock Option shall be determined by
the Committee at the time of grant; provided, that such option price may not be
less than the Fair Market Value of the Stock at the time the Stock Option is
granted.
 
(b)           Option Term. The term of each
Stock Option shall be fixed by the Committee, but no Stock Option shall be
exercisable more than ten (10) years after the date the Option is
granted.
 
(c)           Exercisability. Stock Options
shall be exercisable at such time or times and subject to such terms and
conditions as shall be determined by the Committee; provided, however, that
except as determined by the Committee, no Stock Option shall be exercisable
prior to the first anniversary date of the granting of the Option. If the
Committee provides, in its sole discretion, that any Stock Option is exercisable
only in installments, the Committee may waive such installment exercise
provisions at any time in whole or in part, based on such factors as the
Committee shall determine, in its sole discretion.
 
(d)           Method of Exercise. Subject
to whatever installment exercise provisions apply under Section 5(c) and subject
to whatever restrictions may be imposed by the Company, Stock Options may be
exercised in whole or in part at any time during the option period, by giving
written notice of exercise to the Company specifying the number of shares to be
purchased.
 
Such
notice shall be accompanied by payment in full of the purchase price. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, payment of the option price may be
made: (i) in cash or its equivalent; (ii) by exchanging shares of Stock owned by
the optionee (which are not the subject of any pledge or other security
interest), including in the case of a Non-Qualified Stock Option, Restricted
Stock or Deferred Stock subject to an award hereunder (or an award under the
terms of the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended); (iii) through an
arrangement with a broker approved by the Company whereby payment of the
exercise price is accomplished with the proceeds of the sale of Stock; or (iv)
by any combination of the foregoing, provided that the combined value of all
cash and cash equivalents paid and the Fair Market Value of any such Stock so
tendered to the Company, valued as of the time of such tender, is at least equal
to such option price.
 
If
payment of the option exercise price of a Non-Qualified Stock Option is made in
whole or in part in the form of Restricted Stock, such Restricted Stock (and any
replacement shares relating thereto) shall remain (or be) restricted or
deferred, as the case may be, in accordance with the original terms of the
Restricted Stock award in question, and any additional Stock received upon the
exercise shall be subject to the same forfeiture restrictions or deferral
limitations, unless otherwise determined by the Committee, in its sole
discretion.
 
No shares
of Stock shall be issued upon exercise of a stock option until full payment
therefor has been made. With respect to grants of Options exercisable prior to
January 1, 2005, the optionee shall generally have the rights to dividends or
other rights of a shareholder with respect to shares subject to the Option when
the optionee has given written notice of exercise, has paid in full for such
shares, and, if requested, has given the representation described in Section
14(a). Dividend equivalents or accumulated dividends or other rights of economic
value shall not be issued with Stock Options first becoming exercisable after
December 31, 2004.
 
(e)           Transferability of Options.
Unless the Committee shall permit (on such terms and conditions as it shall
establish) an Option to be transferred to a member of the participant's
immediate family or to a trust or similar vehicle for the benefit of such
immediate family members, no Option shall be assignable or transferable except
by will or the laws of descent and distribution, and except to the extent
required by law, no right or interest of any participant shall be subject to any
lien, obligation or liability of the participant.
 
(f)           Termination by Death. Subject
to Section 5(j), if an optionee's employment by the Company and any Subsidiary
or Affiliate terminates by reason of death, any Stock Option held by such
optionee may thereafter be exercised in accordance with the terms and conditions
established by the Committee.
 
(g)           Termination by Reason of
Disability. Subject to Section 5(j), if an optionee's employment by the
Company and any Subsidiary or Affiliate terminates by reason of Disability, any
Stock Option held by such optionee may thereafter be exercised by the optionee
in accordance with the terms and conditions established by the Committee. In the
event of termination of employment by reason of Disability, if an Incentive
Stock Option is exercised after the expiration of the exercise periods that
apply for purposes of section 422 of the Code, such Stock Option will thereafter
be treated as a Non-Qualified Stock Option.
 
(h)           Termination by Reason of
Retirement. Subject to Section 5(j), if an optionee's employment by the
Company and any Subsidiary or Affiliate terminates by reason of Normal or Early
Retirement, any Stock Option held by such optionee may thereafter be exercised
by the optionee in accordance with the terms and conditions established by the
Committee. In the event of termination of employment by reason of Retirement, if
an Incentive Stock Option is exercised after the expiration of the exercise
periods that apply for purposes of section 422 of the Code, such Stock Option
will thereafter be treated as a Non-Qualified Stock Option.
 
(i)           Other Termination. Unless
otherwise determined by the Committee, if an optionee's employment by the
Company or any Subsidiary or Affiliate terminates for any reason other than
death, Disability or Normal or Early Retirement, the Stock Option shall
thereupon terminate.
 
(j)           Incentive Stock Options.
Anything in the Plan to the contrary notwithstanding, no term of this Plan
relating to Incentive Stock Options shall be interpreted, amended or altered,
nor shall any discretion or authority granted under the Plan be so exercised, so
as to disqualify the Plan under section 422 of the Code, or, without the consent
of the optionee(s) affected, to disqualify any Incentive Stock Option under such
section 422.
 
(k)           Buyout Provisions. The
Committee may at any time offer to buy out for a payment in cash, Stock,
Deferred Stock or Restricted Stock, an option previously granted hereunder,
based on such terms and conditions as the Committee shall establish and
communicate to the participant at the time that such offer is made; provided
that no such buyout shall be permissible to the extent it to would subject the
Option to the requirements of section 409A of the Code or result in a violation
of section 409A of the Code.
 
(1)           Settlement Provisions. With
respect to options exercisable prior to January 1, 2005, if the option
agreement so provides at grant or is amended after grant, and prior to the
exercise (with the optionee’s consent), the Committee may require that all or
part of the shares to be issued with respect to the spread value of an exercised
Option take the form of Deferred or Restricted Stock, which shall be valued at
the time of exercise on the basis of the Fair Market Value (as determined by the
Committee) of such Deferred or Restricted Stock determined without regard to the
deferral limitations and/or the forfeiture restrictions involved.
 
SECTION
6.                                Stock Appreciation
Rights.
 
(a)           Grant and
Exercise.  Stock Appreciation Rights may be granted alone, in
addition to, or in tandem with, other awards granted under the Plan. Any Stock
Appreciation Right granted under the Plan shall be in such form as the Committee
may from time to time approve. Stock Appreciation Rights may be granted in
conjunction with all or part of any Stock Option granted under the Plan. In the
case of a Non-Qualified Stock Option, such rights may be granted either at or
after the time of the grant of such Stock Option. In the case of an Incentive
Stock Option, such rights may be granted only at the time of grant of such Stock
Option.
 
A Stock
Appreciation Right or applicable portion thereof granted with respect to a given
Stock Option shall terminate and no longer be exercisable upon the termination
or exercise of the related Stock Option, subject to such provisions as the
Committee may specify at grant where a Stock Appreciation Right is granted with
respect to less than the full number of shares covered by a related Stock
Option.
 
A Stock
Appreciation Right may be exercised by a grantee, subject to Section 6(b), in
accordance with the procedures established by the Committee from time to time
for such purposes. Upon such exercise, the grantee shall be entitled to receive
an amount determined in the manner prescribed in Section 6(b). Stock Options
relating to exercised Stock Appreciation Rights, and Stock Appreciation Rights
related to any exercised Stock Option, shall no longer be exercisable to the
extent that the related Stock Appreciation Rights or Stock Option, as the case
may be, have been exercised.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. Stock
Appreciation Rights shall be subject to such terms and conditions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Plan, as shall be determined from time
to time by the Committee, including the following:
 
(i)           Stock
Appreciation Rights shall be exercisable at such time and subject to such
conditions as the Committee shall specify, except that any Stock Appreciation
Right granted in tandem with a Stock Option (or portion thereof) shall be
exercisable only at such time or times and to the extent that the Stock Options
to which they relate shall be exercisable in accordance with the provisions of
Section 5 and this Section 6 of the Plan.
 
(ii)           Upon
the exercise of a Stock Appreciation Right, a grantee shall be entitled to
receive an amount in shares of Stock (or, solely to the extent determined by the
Committee, cash) equal in value to the excess of the Fair Market Value (at the
time of exercise) of one share of Stock over the base price per share specified
with respect to the Stock Appreciation Right, multiplied by the number of shares
in respect of which the Stock Appreciation Right shall have been exercised. When
payment is to be made in shares, the number of shares to be paid shall be
calculated on the basis of the Fair Market Value of the shares at the time of
exercise.  Notwithstanding anything in this Section 6(b)(ii) to the
contrary, the base price in respect of any Stock Appreciation Right shall not be
less than the Fair Market Value of the Stock at the time the Stock Appreciation
Right is granted, or in the case of a Stock Appreciation Right granted in tandem
with a Stock Option, the Fair Market Value at the time the related Stock Option
was granted.
 
(iii)           Stock
Appreciation Rights shall be transferable only to the extent that Stock Options
may be transferable under Section 5(e) of the Plan.
 
(iv)           Upon
the exercise of a Stock Appreciation Right, regardless of whether granted on a
stand-alone basis or in tandem with any Stock Option, only the number of shares
of Stock actually issued in connection with the exercise of such Stock
Appreciation Right (and not the corresponding number of shares of Stock related
to the Stock Appreciation Right (or portion thereof) being exercised) shall be
treated as issued under the Plan and, for the purpose of the limitation set
forth in Section 3 of the Plan on the number of shares of Stock issuable under
the Plan, the remaining number of shares of Stock related to such exercised
Stock Appreciation Right (or portion thereof), including the corresponding
number of shares related to any tandem Stock Option cancelled upon such
exercise, shall again be available for issuance under the Plan.
 
SECTION
7.                                Restricted
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Shares of
Restricted Stock may be issued either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with,
other awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the
Plan.  The Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom, and
the time or times at which, grants of Restricted Stock will be made, the number
of shares to be awarded, the price (if any) to be paid by the recipient of
Restricted Stock (subject to Section 7(b)), the time or times within which such
awards may be subject to forfeiture, and all other terms and conditions of the
awards.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Restricted Stock upon the attainment of
specified Performance Criteria or such other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Restricted Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Awards and Certificates. The
prospective recipient of a Restricted Stock award shall not have any rights with
respect to such award, unless and until the Company and such recipient have
executed an agreement evidencing the award and the recipient has delivered a
fully executed copy thereof to the Company, and has otherwise complied with the
applicable terms and conditions of such award.
 
(i)           The
purchase price for shares of Restricted Stock shall be equal to or less than
their par value and may be zero.
 
(ii)           Awards
of Restricted Stock must be accepted within a reasonable period (or such
specific period as the Committee may specify at grant) after the award date, by
executing a Restricted Stock award agreement and paying whatever price (if any)
is required under Section 7(b)(i).
 
(iii)           Each
participant receiving a Restricted Stock award shall be issued a stock
certificate in respect of such shares of Restricted Stock. Such certificate
shall be registered in the name of such participant, and shall bear an
appropriate legend referring to the terms, conditions, and restrictions
applicable to such award.
 
(iv)           The
Committee shall require that the stock certificates evidencing such shares be
held in custody by the Company until the restrictions thereon shall have lapsed,
and that, as a condition of any Restricted Stock award, the participant shall
have delivered a stock power, endorsed in blank, relating to the Stock covered
by such award.
 
(c)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Restricted Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 7 shall be subject
to the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement, during a period set by
the Committee commencing with the date of such award (the “Restriction Period”),
the participant shall not be permitted to sell, transfer, pledge or assign
shares of Restricted Stock awarded under the Plan. Within these limits and
subject to Sections 7(c)(iv) and/or 7(c)(v), the Committee, in its sole
discretion, may provide for the lapse of such restrictions in installments and
may accelerate or waive such restrictions in whole or in part, based on service,
Performance Criteria and/or such other factors as the Committee may determine,
in its sole discretion.
 
(ii)           If
and when the Restriction Period expires without a prior forfeiture of the
Restricted Stock subject to such Restriction Period, certificates for an
appropriate number of unrestricted shares of Stock shall be delivered to the
participant promptly (unless the Committee decides pursuant to Section 2(f) to
settle the award in cash).
 
(iii)           The
voting rights and/or dividend rights, if any, of the Restricted Stock award
shall be established by the Committee pursuant to Section 2(i).
 
(iv)           An
award of Restricted Stock, where the Restriction Period is based on Performance
Criteria, shall have a Restriction Period of at least one (1) year.
 
(v)           An
award of Restricted Stock, where the Restriction Period is based on service,
shall have a Restriction Period of at least three (3) years.
 
(vi)           In
determining the Restriction Period for any award of Restricted Stock granted in
replacement of a non-Plan award of Stock or non-Plan award valued by reference
to the Stock, the Restriction Period shall be deemed to have commenced on the
date such non-Plan award was originally granted.
 
(d)           Minimum Value Provisions. In
order to better ensure that award payments actually reflect the performance of
the Company and service of the participant, the Committee may provide, in its
sole discretion, for a tandem performance-based or other award designed to
guarantee a minimum value, payable in cash or Stock to the recipient of a
Restricted Stock award, subject to such Performance Criteria, future service,
deferral and other terms and conditions as may be specified by the
Committee.  Any deferral terms shall comply with section 409A of the
Code.
 
SECTION
8.                                Deferred
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Deferred
Stock may be awarded either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other
awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the Plan. The
Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom and the time or times at
which Deferred Stock shall be awarded, the number of shares of Deferred Stock to
be awarded to any person, the duration of the period (the “Deferral Period”)
during which, and the conditions under which, receipt of the Stock will be
deferred, and the other terms and conditions of the award in addition to those
set forth in Section 8(b).  Awards of Deferred Stock may be subject to
the provisions of section 409A of the Code, and it is intended that any such
grant shall be made and administered in compliance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Deferred Stock upon the attainment of
specified Performance Criteria or such other factors or criteria as the
Committee shall determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Deferred Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Deferred Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 8 shall be subject to
the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement referred to in Section
8(b)(iv) below, Deferred Stock awards may not be sold, assigned, transferred,
pledged or otherwise encumbered during the Deferral Period. At the expiration of
the Deferral Period (or the Elective Deferral Period referred to in Section
8(b)(iii), where applicable), stock certificates shall be delivered to the
participant, or his legal representative, in a number equal to the shares
covered by the Deferred Stock award (unless the Committee decides pursuant to
Section 2(f) to settle the award in cash).
 
(ii)           Subject
to Sections 8(b)(vi) and/or 8(b)(vii), the Committee may accelerate the vesting
of all or any part of any Deferred Stock award and/or waive the deferral
limitations in whole or in part, based on service, Performance Criteria and/or
such other factors as the Committee may determine, in its sole
discretion.
 
(iii)           Deferral
of awards (or any installment thereof) shall not be permitted except in
conformance with Internal Revenue Service transitional guidance under section
409A of the Code that does not result in a violation of section 409A of the
Code, including Internal Revenue Service Notices 2005-1, 2006-67 and
2007-86.
 
(iv)           Each
award shall be confirmed by, and subject to the terms of, a Deferred Stock
agreement executed by the Company and the participant.
 
(v)           The
dividend rights, if any, of the Deferred Stock award established by the
Committee pursuant to Section 2(j).  Such rights shall be issued in
conformance with section 409A of the Code.
 
(vi)           An
award of Deferred Stock, where the Deferral Period is based on Performance
Criteria, shall have a Deferral Period of at least one (1) year.
 
(vii)           An
award of Deferred Stock, where the Deferral Period is based on service, shall
have a Deferral Period of at least three (3) years.
 
(viii)                      In
determining the Deferral Period for any award of Deferred Stock granted in
replacement of a non-Plan award of Stock or non-Plan award valued by reference
to the Stock, the Deferral Period shall be deemed to have commenced on the date
such non-Plan award was originally granted.
 
(c)           Minimum Value Provisions. In
order to better ensure that award payments actually reflect the performance of
the Company and service of the participant, the Committee may provide, in its
sole discretion, for a tandem performance-based or other award designed to
guarantee a minimum value, payable in cash or Stock to the recipient of a
Deferred Stock award, subject to such Performance Criteria, future service,
deferral and other terms and conditions as may be specified by the
Committee.
 
SECTION
9.                                Other
Stock Based Awards.
 
(a)           Administration. Other awards
of Stock and other awards that are valued in whole or in part by reference to,
or are otherwise based on, Stock (“Other Stock Based Awards”), including,
without limitation, performance shares, convertible preferred stock, convertible
debentures, exchangeable securities and Stock awards or options valued by
reference to Book Value or subsidiary performance, may be granted either alone
or in addition to, Restricted Stock, Deferred Stock, Stock Purchase Rights or
Performance Related Awards granted under the Plan and/or cash awards made
outside of the Plan.
 
Subject
to the provisions of the Plan, the Committee shall have authority to determine
the persons to whom and the time or times at which such awards shall be made,
the amount of such awards, and all other conditions of the awards including any
dividend and/or voting rights, but, where applicable, in conformity with section
409A of the Code.  Subject to Sections 9(b)(iv) and 9(b)(v), the
Committee may also provide for the grant of Stock upon the attainment of
specified Performance Criteria or such other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Other Stock Based Awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. Other
Stock Based Awards made pursuant to this Section 9 shall be subject to the
following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement referred to in Section
9(b)(ii) below, awards made under this Section 9 may not be sold, assigned,
transferred, pledged or otherwise encumbered prior to the date on which any
shares are issued or amounts are paid, or, if later, the date on which any
applicable restriction, performance or deferral period lapses. Subject to
Sections 9(b)(iv) and/or 9(b)(v), the Committee, in its sole discretion, may
accelerate the vesting of all or any part of any Other Stock Based Award, and/or
waive any restrictions or deferral limitations in whole or in part, based on
service, Performance Criteria and/or other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion but only to the extent permitted under section
409A of the Code with respect to Other Stock Based Awards that are subject to
section 409A of the Code.
 
(ii)           Each
award under this Section 9 shall be confirmed by, and subject to the terms of,
an agreement or other instrument by the Company and by the
participant.
 
(iii)           Stock
(including securities convertible into Stock) issued on a bonus basis under this
Section 9 may be issued for no cash consideration. Stock (including securities
convertible into Stock) purchased pursuant to a purchase right awarded under
this Section 9 shall be purchased at price(s) determined by the Committee, in
its sole discretion.
 
(iv)           Any
Other Stock Based Award that has a Restriction Period or Deferral Period that is
based on Performance Criteria shall have a Restriction Period or Deferral
Period, as the case may be, of at least one (1) year.
 
(v)           Any
Other Stock Based Award that has a Restriction Period or Deferral Period that is
based on service shall have a Restriction Period or Deferral Period, as the case
may be, of at least three (3) years.
 
(vi)           In
determining the Restriction Period or Deferral Period for any Other Stock Based
Award granted in replacement of a non-Plan award of Stock or non-Plan award
valued by reference to the Stock, the Restriction Period or Deferral Period, as
applicable, shall be deemed to have commenced on the date such non-Plan award
was originally granted.
 
SECTION
10. Performance Related Awards.
 
(a)           Performance Objectives.
Notwithstanding anything else contained in the Plan to the contrary, unless the
Committee otherwise determines at the time of grant, any award of Restricted
Stock or Deferred Stock or Other Stock Based Awards to an officer who is subject
to the reporting requirements of section 16(a) of the Exchange Act other than an
award which will vest solely on the basis of the passage of time, shall become
vested, if at all, upon the determination by the Committee that performance
objectives established by the Committee have been attained, in whole or in part
(a “Performance Award”). Such performance objectives shall be determined over a
measurement period or periods established by the Committee (which period or
periods shall not be less than one (1) year) and related to at least one of the
following criteria, which may be determined solely by reference to the
performance of: (i) the Company; (ii) a Subsidiary; (iii) an Affiliate; (iv) a
division or unit of any of the foregoing or based on comparative performance of
any of the foregoing relative to past performance or to other companies: (A)
return on equity; (B) total shareholder return; (C) revenues; (D) cash flows,
revenues and/or earnings relative to other parameters (e.g., net or gross
assets); (E) operating income; (F) return on investment; (G) changes in the
value of the Stock; and (H) return on assets (the “Performance Criteria”).
Excluding Stock Options and/or Stock Appreciation Rights granted hereunder, the
maximum number of shares of Stock that may be subject to any such Performance
Award granted to any key employee in any calendar year shall not exceed 100,000
shares, as such number may be adjusted pursuant to Section 3.
 
(b)           Annual Incentive
Compensation. The Committee may, in addition to the Performance Awards
described above, pay cash amounts under the Plan or any other plan or
arrangement approved by the Committee, provided such other plan or arrangement
is in conformity with the provisions of this Section 10(b), to any officer of
the Company or any Subsidiary who is subject to the reporting requirements of
section 16(a) of the Exchange Act upon the achievement, in whole or in part, of
performance goals or objectives established in writing by the Committee with
respect to such performance periods as the Committee shall determine. Any such
goals or objectives shall be based on one or more of the Performance Criteria.
Notwithstanding anything else contained herein to the contrary, the maximum
amount of any such cash payment to any single officer with respect to any
calendar year shall not exceed the lesser of (i) $2,000,000; or (ii) twice the
officer's annual base salary as in effect on the last day of the preceding
fiscal year.
 
(c)           Interpretation.
Notwithstanding anything else contained in the Plan to the contrary, to the
extent required to so qualify any Performance Award as other performance based
compensation within the meaning of section 162(m)(4)(C) of the Code, the
Committee shall not be entitled to exercise any discretion otherwise authorized
under the Plan (such as the right to accelerate vesting without regard to the
achievement of the relevant performance objectives) with respect to such
Performance Award if the ability to exercise such discretion (as opposed to the
exercise of such discretion) would cause such award to fail to qualify as other
performance based compensation.
 
SECTION
11.                                Change
in Control Provisions.
 
(a)           Impact of
Event.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 7(c)(iv),
7(c)(v), 8(b)(vi), 8(b)(vii), 9(b)(iv) and 9(b)(v), in the event
of:
 
(i)           a
“Change in Control” as defined in Section 11(b) or a “Potential Change in
Control” as defined in Section 11(c):
 
(A)           Any
Stock Options awarded under the Plan not previously exercisable and vested shall
become fully exercisable and vested;
 
(B)           The
restrictions and deferral limitations applicable to any Restricted Stock,
Deferred Stock, Other Stock Based Awards and Performance Awards, in each case to
the extent not already vested under the Plan, shall lapse and such shares and
awards shall be deemed fully vested and any Performance Criteria shall be deemed
met at target; and
 
(C)           The
value of all outstanding LTIP Awards to the extent vested may at the sole
discretion of the Committee at or after grant but prior to any Change in
Control, be cashed out on the basis of the “Change in Control Price” as defined
in Section 11(d) as of the date such Change in Control or Potential Change in
Control is determined to have occurred or such other date as the Committee may
determine prior to the Change in Control, provided that payment of awards
subject to section 409A of the Code shall be made in a manner compliant with
section 409A.
 
(b)           Definition of “Change in
Control”.  For purposes of Section 11(a), a “Change in Control”
means the happening of any of the following:
 
(i)           When
any “person” as defined in section 3(a)(9) of the Exchange Act and as used in
sections 13(d) and 14(d) thereof, including a “group” as defined in section
13(d) of the Exchange Act but excluding the Company, any Subsidiary or any
employee benefit plan sponsored or maintained by the Company or any Subsidiary
(including any trustee of such plan acting as trustee), directly or indirectly,
becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act,
as amended from time to time), of securities of the Company representing fifteen
percent (15%) or more of the combined voting power of the Company's then
outstanding securities;
 
(ii)           The
individuals who, as of December 31, 2008, constitute the Board (the “Incumbent
Board”) cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board;
provided, however, that any individual becoming a director subsequent to such
date whose election, or nomination for election by the Company's shareholders,
was approved by a vote of at least a majority of the directors then comprising
the Incumbent Board shall be considered as though such individual were a member
of the Incumbent Board, but excluding, for this purpose, any such individual
whose initial assumption of office occurs as a result of an actual or threatened
election contest with respect to the election or removal of directors or other
actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or consents by or on behalf of a
person other than the Board; or
 
(iii)           Consummation
of a reorganization, merger or consolidation or sale or other disposition of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company or the acquisition of assets
of another corporation (a “Business Combination”), in each case, unless,
following such Business Combination: (A) all or substantially all of the
individuals and entities who were the beneficial owners, respectively, of the
then outstanding shares of Stock of the Company and the combined voting power of
the then outstanding voting securities of the Company entitled to vote generally
in the election of directors immediately prior to such Business Combination
beneficially own, directly or indirectly, more than sixty percent (60%) of,
respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock and the combined
voting power of the then outstanding voting securities entitled to vote
generally in the election of directors, as the case may be, of the corporation
resulting from such Business Combination (including, without limitation, a
corporation which as a result of such transaction owns the Company or all or
substantially all of the Company's assets either directly or through one or more
subsidiaries); (B) no person (excluding any employee benefit plan (or related
trust) of the Company or such corporation resulting from such Business
Combination) beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, fifteen percent (15%) or
more of, respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination or the combined voting
power of the then outstanding voting securities of such corporation except to
the extent that such ownership existed prior to the Business Combination; and
(C) at least a majority of the members of the board of directors of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination were members of the
Incumbent Board at the time of the execution of the initial agreement, or of the
action of the Board, providing for such Business Combination; or
 
(iv)           Approval
by the shareholders of the Company of a complete liquidation or dissolution of
the Company.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 11(b) hereinabove, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or change in
effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial portion of the
assets of the Company, in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the
specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii)
or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
(c)           Definition of Potential Change in
Control.  For purposes of Section 11(a), a “Potential Change in
Control” means the happening of any one of the following:
 
(i)           The
approval by shareholders of an agreement by the Company, the consummation of
which would result in a Change in Control of the Company as defined in Section
11(b); or
 
(ii)           The
acquisition of beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any entity,
person or group (other than the Company or Subsidiary or any Company employee
benefit plan (including any trustee of such plan acting as such trustee)) of
securities of the Company representing five percent (5%) or more of the combined
voting power of the Company’s outstanding securities and the adoption by the
Board of a resolution to the effect that a Potential Change in Control of the
Company has occurred for purposes of this Plan.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 11(c) hereinabove, a Potential Change in Control shall be
deemed to have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or
change in effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial
portion of the assets of the Company, in each case as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such
purpose the specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v),
(vi) and (vii) or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any
elective percentage.
 
(d)           Change in Control Price. For
the purposes of this Section 11, “Change in Control Price” means the highest
price per share paid in any transaction reported on the New York Stock Exchange
Composite Index, or paid or offered in any bona fide transaction related to a
potential or actual Change in Control of the Company at any time during the
sixty (60) day period immediately preceding the occurrence of the Change in
Control, in each case as determined by the Committee except that, in the case of
Incentive Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights relating to Incentive
Stock Options, such price shall be based only on transactions reported for the
date on which the optionee exercises such Incentive Stock Options or Stock
Appreciation Rights or, where applicable, the date on which a cashout occurs
under Section 11(a)(i)(C).
 
SECTION
12.  Amendments and Termination.
 
The Board
may amend, alter, or discontinue the Plan, but no amendment, alteration, or
discontinuation shall be made which would impair the rights of an optionee or
participant under an LTIP Award theretofore granted, without the optionee's or
participant's consent.
 
The
Committee may amend the terms of any Stock Option or other award theretofore
granted, prospectively or retroactively, but subject to Section 2 above, no such
amendment shall impair the rights of any holder without the holder's
consent.
 
Subject
to the above provisions, the Board shall have broad authority to amend the Plan
to take into account changes in applicable securities and tax laws and
accounting rules, as well as other developments.
 
Notwithstanding
the above, no amendment shall be made that shall constitute an impermissible
acceleration of an award that is subject to section 409A of the Code and awards
subject to section 409A may be amended without participant consent to the extent
provided in Section 2 of this Plan.
 
SECTION
13. Unfunded Status of Plan.
 
The Plan
is intended to constitute an “unfunded” plan for incentive and deferred
compensation. With respect to any payments not yet made to a participant or
optionee by the Company, nothing contained herein shall give any such
participant or optionee any rights that are greater than those of a general
creditor of the Company. In its sole discretion, the Committee may authorize the
creation of trusts or other arrangements to meet the obligations created under
the Plan to deliver Stock or payments in lieu of or with respect to awards
hereunder; provided, however, that unless the Committee otherwise determines
with the consent of the affected participant, the existence of such trusts or
other arrangements is consistent with the “unfunded” status of the
Plan.  Trusts or other arrangements so established shall be subject to
the limitations of section 409A(b) of the Code.
 
SECTION
14. General Provisions.
 
(a)           The
Committee may require each person purchasing shares pursuant to a Stock Option
or other award under the Plan to represent to and agree with the Company in
writing that the optionee or participant is acquiring the shares without a view
to distribution thereof. The certificates for such shares may include any legend
which the Committee deems appropriate to reflect any restrictions on
transfer.
 
All
certificates for shares of Stock or other securities delivered under the Plan
shall be subject to such stock-transfer orders and other restrictions as the
Committee may deem advisable under the rules, regulations, and other
requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission, any stock exchange upon
which the Stock is then listed, and any applicable federal or state securities
law, and the Committee may cause a legend or legends to be put on any such
certificates to make appropriate reference to such restrictions.
 
(b)           Nothing
contained in this Plan shall prevent the Board from adopting other or additional
compensation arrangements, subject to stockholder approval if such approval is
required, and such arrangements may be either generally applicable or applicable
only in specific cases.
 
(c)           The
adoption of the Plan shall not confer upon any employee of the Company or any
Subsidiary or Affiliate any right to continued employment with the Company or a
Subsidiary or Affiliate, as the case may be, nor shall it interfere in any way
with the right of the Company or a Subsidiary or Affiliate to terminate the
employment of any of its employees at any time.
 
(d)           Except
as the participant and the Company may otherwise agree, no later than the date
as of which an amount first becomes includible in the gross income of the
participant for federal income tax purposes with respect to any award under the
Plan, the participant shall pay to the Company, or make arrangements
satisfactory to the Committee regarding the payment of, any federal, state, or
local taxes of any kind required by law to be withheld with respect to such
amount. Unless otherwise determined by the Committee, withholding obligations
may be settled with Stock, including Stock that is part of the award that gives
rise to the withholding requirement. The obligations of the Company under the
Plan shall be conditional on such payment or arrangements, and the Company and
its Subsidiaries or Affiliates shall, to the extent permitted by law, have the
right to deduct any such taxes from any payment of any kind otherwise due to the
participant.
 
(e)           The
actual or deemed reinvestment of dividends or dividend equivalents in additional
Restricted Stock (or in Deferred Stock or other types of Plan awards) at the
time of any dividend payment shall only be permissible if sufficient shares of
Stock are available under Section 3 for such reinvestment (taking into account
then outstanding Stock Options and other Plan awards).
 
(f)           The
Committee may permit a participant to postpone the delivery of Stock under any
award, including a Stock Option, under the Plan upon such terms and conditions
as the Committee shall determine, but, with respect to awards subject to section
409A of the Code, only in conformance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
(g)           The
Plan and all awards made and actions taken thereunder shall be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware.
 
SECTION
15. Effective Date of Plan.
 
As
amended, the Plan shall be effective as of May 21, 1998, with changes effected
hereunder effective as of January 1, 2005.
 
SECTION
16. Term of Plan.
 
No LTIP
Award shall be granted pursuant to the Plan on or after the tenth anniversary of
the date of shareholder approval, but awards granted prior to such tenth
anniversary may extend beyond that date, in accordance with the terms of such
awards.
 
SECTION
17. Applicability to Grants under 1988 Plan.
 
The
provisions of the Plan relating to stock options, stock appreciation rights,
restricted stock awards, deferred stock awards, other stock-based awards or
performance related awards shall apply to, and govern existing and subsequent
stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock awards, deferred
stock awards, other stock-based awards or performance related awards granted
under the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended.
 


 



 






 






EX-10.149
61
ex10149.htm
DIRECTORS PENSION BENEFITS, AMENDED

ex10149.htm







Amended
and Restated Air Transportation Plan
for Non-Employee Directors
of AMR Corporation


Section
409A of the Internal Revenue Code applies to the complimentary air
transportation provided to the non-employee Directors of AMR Corporation
(“AMR”).  In order to avoid imposition of certain income taxes,
penalty taxes and interest, the air transportation plan for non-employee
Directors of AMR is hereby amended and restated as provided below, effective as
of January 1, 2005.

Each
current or former non-employee Director of AMR and his or her spouse or
companion and dependent children (under the age of twenty-three (23)) are
entitled to unlimited complimentary air transportation in any available class of
service on American Airlines and American Eagle (“American”) and free Admirals
Club memberships.
 
If the
Director served on the AMR Board of Directors (the “Board”) for at least ten
(10) years and retired from the Board on or after age seventy (70), American
will continue to provide complimentary air transportation for the individuals
described above following his or her service on the Board until the later of the
death of the Director and the Director’s spouse or companion.  If the
Director served on the Board for less than ten (10) years or retired from the
Board prior to age seventy (70), American will continue to provide complimentary
air transportation for the individuals described above for the number of years
the Director served on the Board, commencing with the date on which the Director
no longer is a member of the Board.
 
American
will be responsible for any taxes on such air transportation and will reimburse
each Director for any taxes paid for this transportation.  Tax
reimbursements will be made not later than the last day of the taxable year
following the year in which the Director paid these taxes, and such
reimbursement cannot be further deferred.  Such air transportation and
tax reimbursements cannot be exchanged for any other benefit or liquidated for
other compensation, and the amount of air transportation used in a particular
year will not otherwise affect the air transportation the Director may use in
any other year.
 
The Board
may amend or terminate this plan at any time.
 




EX-10.150
62
ex10150.htm
TRAVEL PLAN FOR NON-EMPLOYEE DIRECTORS, AMENDED

ex10150.htm






AMR
CORPORATION
 
2003
EMPLOYEE STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
 
AS
AMENDED
 
SECTION
1. Purpose;
Definitions.
 
The
purpose of the AMR Corporation 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan, as amended
hereby (the “Plan”) is to enable AMR Corporation (the “Company”) to retain and
reward employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates, and
strengthen the mutuality of interests between such employees and the Company’s
shareholders, by offering such employees equity-based incentives in the
Company.  Since the adoption of this Plan, section 409A of the Code
(as defined below) has been enacted, and requires revision of the Plan document,
as well as do various awards issued thereunder.  The effective date of
this amendment shall be January 1, 2005.
 
For
purposes of the Plan, the following terms shall be defined as set forth
below:
 
(a)           “Affiliate”
means any entity other than the Company and its Subsidiaries that is designated
by the Board as a participating employer under the Plan, provided that the
Company directly or indirectly owns at least twenty percent (20%) of the
combined voting power of all classes of stock of such entity or at least twenty
percent (20%) of the ownership interests in such entity.
 
(b)           “Board”
means the Board of Directors of the Company.
 
(c)           “Cause”
means a felony conviction of a participant or the failure of a participant to
contest prosecution for a felony, or a participant’s willful misconduct or
dishonesty, any of which is directly and materially harmful to the business or
reputation of the Company or any Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
(d)           “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, and any
successor thereto.
 
(e)           “Committee”
means the Committee referred to in Section 2 of the Plan. If at any time no
Committee shall be in office, then the functions of the Committee specified in
the Plan shall be exercised by the Board.
 
(f)           “Company”
means AMR Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Delaware, or any successor corporation.
 
(g)           “Deferred
Stock” means the right to receive Stock at the end of a specified deferral
period pursuant to Section 7.
 
(h)           “Disability”,
for awards not subject to section 409A of the Code, means disability as
determined under a long term disability plan of the Company.  For
awards subject to section 409A, “Disability” shall have the meaning given in
section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Code; determination of such Disability shall be
made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or
successor guidance thereto.
 
(i)           “Early
Retirement” means retirement, with the express consent of the Company at or
before the time of such retirement, from active employment by any Subsidiary or
Affiliate.
 
(j)           “Exchange
Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time,
and any successor thereto.
 
(k)           “Fair
Market Value” means, as of any given date, unless otherwise determined by the
Committee in good faith, the mean between the highest and lowest quoted selling
price, regular way, of the Stock on the New York Stock Exchange or, if no such
sale of Stock occurs on the New York Stock Exchange on such date, the fair
market value of the Stock as determined by the Committee in good
faith.
 
(1)           “Normal
Retirement” means retirement from active employment by any Subsidiary or
Affiliate pursuant to the retirement provisions of the applicable pension plan
of such entity.
 
(m)           “Plan”
means this AMR Corporation 2003 Stock Incentive Plan as amended hereby, and as
it may be amended from time to time hereafter.
 
(n)           “Restricted
Stock” means shares of Stock that are subject to restrictions under Section 6
below.
 
(o)           “Retirement”
means Normal or Early Retirement.
 
(p)           “Stock”
means the Common Stock, $1.00 par value per share, of the Company.
 
(q)           “Stock
Option” or “Option” means any option to purchase shares of Stock (including
Restricted Stock and Deferred Stock, if the Committee so determines) granted
pursuant to Section 5 below.
 
(r)           “Subsidiary”
means any corporation (other than the Company) in an unbroken chain of
corporations beginning with the Company if each of the corporations (other than
the last corporation in the unbroken chain) owns stock possessing fifty percent
(50%) or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock in one
of the other corporations in the chain.
 
(s)           In
addition, the terms “Awards,” “Award,” “Change in Control,” “Potential Change in
Control” and “Change in Control Price” shall have the meanings set forth,
respectively, in Section 8 below.
 
SECTION
2. Administration.
 
The Plan
shall be administered by a committee of not less than two members of the Board,
who shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the Board. In selecting
the members of the Committee, the Board shall take into account the requirements
for the members of the Committee to be treated as “Non-Employee Directors” for
purposes of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated under section 16 of the Exchange Act. The
functions of the Committee specified in the Plan shall be exercised by the
Board, if and to the extent that no Committee exists which has the authority to
so administer the Plan, or to the extent that the Committee is not comprised
solely of Non-Employee Directors for purposes of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated
under section 16 of the Exchange Act.
 
The
Committee shall have full authority to grant, pursuant to the terms of the Plan,
to officers and other key employees eligible under Section 4: (i) Stock Options;
(ii) Restricted Stock; and/or (iii) Deferred Stock (collectively, the “Awards”
and singularly, an “Award”).
 
In
particular the Committee shall have the authority:
 
(a)           to
select the employees of the Subsidiaries and Affiliates to whom Awards may from
time to time be granted hereunder;
 
(b)           to
determine whether and to what extent Awards, or any combination thereof, are to
be granted hereunder to one or more eligible employees;
 
(c)           subject
to the provisions of Sections 3 and 4, to determine the number of shares to be
covered by each such award granted hereunder;
 
(d)           to
determine the terms and conditions, not inconsistent with the terms of the Plan,
of any award granted hereunder (including, but not limited to, the share price
and any restriction or limitation, or any vesting, acceleration or waiver of
forfeiture restrictions regarding any Stock Option or other award and/or the
shares of Stock relating thereto, based in each case on such factors as the
Committee shall determine in its sole discretion);
 
(e)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances a Stock Option
may be settled in cash, Restricted Stock and/or Deferred Stock under Section
5(f) or 5(g), as applicable, instead of Stock;
 
(f)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances an award of
Restricted Stock or Deferred Stock may be settled in cash;
 
(g)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Option grants
and/or other awards under the Plan and/or other cash awards made by the Company
are to be made, and operate, on a tandem basis vis-a-vis other awards under the
Plan and/or cash awards made outside of the Plan, or on an additive
basis;
 
(h)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Stock and other
amounts payable with respect to an award under this Plan shall be deferred
either automatically or at the election of the participant (including providing
for and determining the amount (if any) of any deemed earnings on any deferred
amount during any deferral period) provided that any such deferral may be
accomplished only if exempt from, or in accordance with, section 409A of the
Code;
 
(i)           with
respect to an award of Restricted Stock, to determine whether the right to vote
will be granted with such award and/or whether any dividends declared with
respect to such award will be paid in cash, additional Restricted Stock,
Deferred Stock or not at all;
 
(j)           with
respect to an award of Deferred Stock, to determine whether any dividends
declared with respect to such award will be paid in cash, Restricted Stock,
additional Deferred Stock or not at all; and
 
(k)           to
determine the terms and conditions pursuant to which an Award may vest on a pro
rata basis or be terminated.
 
The
Committee shall have the authority: to adopt, alter and repeal such rules,
guidelines and practices governing the Plan as it shall, from time to time, deem
advisable; to interpret the terms and provisions of the Plan and any award
issued under the Plan (and any agreements relating thereto); and to otherwise
supervise the administration of the Plan.
 
All
decisions made by the Committee pursuant to the provisions of the Plan shall be
made in the Committee’s sole discretion and shall be final and binding on all
persons, including the Company and Plan participants.  Section 409A of
the Code applies to certain awards under this Plan, and it is intended that all
such awards shall be issued, administered, exercised and paid or transferred in
conformance therewith.  Accordingly, notwithstanding anything in
Article 9 to the contrary, the Committee shall have authority to amend or
restate the terms of a grant or award to preclude violation of section 409A of
the Code, without the consent of the recipient thereof.
 
SECTION
3. Stock
Subject to Plan.
 
The total
number of shares of Stock reserved and available for distribution under the Plan
shall be 42,680,000 shares. Such shares may consist, in whole or in part, of
authorized and unissued shares.
 
If any
shares of Stock that have been optioned cease to be subject to a Stock Option,
or if any such shares of Stock that are subject to any Restricted Stock or
Deferred Stock award granted hereunder are forfeited or any such award otherwise
terminates without a payment being made to the participant in the form of Stock,
such shares shall again be available for distribution in connection with future
awards under the Plan.
 
In the
event of any merger, reorganization, consolidation, recapitalization, stock
dividend, stock split or other change in corporate structure affecting the
Stock, such substitution or adjustment shall be made in the aggregate number of
shares reserved for issuance under the Plan, in the number and option price of
shares subject to outstanding Options granted under the Plan, and in the number
of shares subject to other outstanding awards granted under the Plan as may be
determined to be appropriate by the Committee, in its sole discretion, provided
that the number of shares subject to any award shall always be a whole
number.
 
SECTION
4. Eligibility;
Limitations.
 
All of
the employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates, including all
of those full-time employees in the United States who are “exempt employees,” as
defined under Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, are eligible to receive Awards
under the Plan. At least a majority of the shares of Stock or shares of Stock
underlying Options or other Awards awarded under the Plan during any three-year
period must be awarded to employees who are not officers or directors of the
Company.  No single officer of the Company may acquire under the Plan
more than one percent of the outstanding Stock at the time the Plan is
adopted.
 
SECTION
5. Stock
Options.
 
Stock
Options may be granted alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other awards
granted under the Plan. Any Stock Option granted under the Plan shall be in such
form as the Committee may from time to time approve.
 
Stock
Options granted under the Plan shall not be “incentive stock options” within the
meaning of section 422 of the Code unless the Company obtains the required
shareholder approval of the Plan.
 
Options
granted under the Plan shall be subject to the following terms and conditions
and shall contain such additional terms and conditions, not inconsistent with
the terms of the Plan, as the Committee shall deem desirable:
 
(a)           Option Price.  The
option price per share of Stock purchasable under a Stock Option shall be
determined by the Committee at the time of grant; provided, that such option
price may not be less than the Fair Market Value of the Stock on the date the
Stock Option is granted.
 
(b)           Option Term.  The
term of each Stock Option shall be fixed by the Committee, but no Stock Option
shall be exercisable more than ten (10) years after the date the Option is
granted.
 
(c)           Exercisability.  Stock
Options shall be exercisable at such time or times and subject to such terms and
conditions as shall be determined by the Committee. If the Committee provides,
in its sole discretion, that any Stock Option is exercisable only in
installments, the Committee may waive such installment exercise provisions at
any time in whole or in part, based on such factors as the Committee shall
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
(d)           Method of
Exercise.  Subject to whatever installment exercise provisions
apply under Section 5(c) and subject to whatever restrictions may be imposed by
the Company, Stock Options may be exercised in whole or in part at any time
during the option period, by giving written notice of exercise to the Company
specifying the number of shares to be purchased. Such notice shall be
accompanied by payment in full of the purchase price in such manner and on such
reasonable terms and conditions as the Committee shall establish from time to
time.
 
No shares
of Stock shall be issued upon exercise of a stock option until full payment
therefor has been made. With respect to grants of exercisable options prior to
January 1, 2005, the optionee shall generally have the rights to dividends or
other rights of a shareholder with respect to shares subject to the Option when
the optionee has given written notice of exercise, has paid in full for such
shares, and, if requested, has given the representation described in Section
11(a).  Dividend equivalents or accumulated dividends or other rights
of economic value shall not be issued with Stock Options first becoming
exercisable after December 31, 2004.
 
(e)           Transferability of Options.
Unless the Committee shall permit (on such terms and conditions as it shall
establish) an Option to be transferred to a member of the participant’s
immediate family or to a trust or similar vehicle for the benefit of such
immediate family members, no Option shall be assignable or transferable except
by will or the laws of descent and distribution, and except to the extent
required by law, no right or interest of any participant shall be subject to any
lien, obligation or liability of the participant.
 
(f)           Buyout Provisions. The
Committee may at any time offer to buy out for a payment in cash, Stock,
Deferred Stock or Restricted Stock, an option previously granted hereunder,
based on such terms and conditions as the Committee shall establish and
communicate to the participant at the time that such offer is made; provided
that no such buyout shall be permissible to the extent it would subject the
Option to the requirement of section 409A of the Code or result in a violation
of section 409A of the Code.
 
(g)           Settlement Provisions. With
respect to options exercisable prior to January 1, 2005, if the option agreement
so provides at grant, or is amended after grant, and prior to the exercise, to
so provide (with the optionee’s consent), the Committee may require that all or
part of the shares to be issued with respect to the spread value of an exercised
Option take the form of Deferred or Restricted Stock, which shall be valued on
the date of exercise on the basis of the Fair Market Value (as determined by the
Committee) of such Deferred or Restricted Stock determined without regard to the
deferral limitations and/or the forfeiture restrictions involved.
 
SECTION
6. Restricted
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Shares of
Restricted Stock may be issued either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with,
other awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the Plan. The
Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom, and the time or times at
which, grants of Restricted Stock will be made, the number of shares to be
awarded, the price (if any) to be paid by the recipient of Restricted Stock, the
time or times within which such awards may be subject to forfeiture, and all
other terms and conditions of the awards.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Restricted Stock upon the attainment of
specified performance criteria or such other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Restricted Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Restricted Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 6 shall be subject
to the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement, during a period set by
the Committee commencing with the date of such award (the “Restriction Period”),
the participant shall not be permitted to sell, transfer, pledge or assign
shares of Restricted Stock awarded under the Plan. Within these limits the
Committee, in its sole discretion, may provide for the lapse of such
restrictions in installments and may accelerate or waive such restrictions in
whole or in part, based on service and/or such other factors as the Committee
may determine, in its sole discretion.
 
(ii)           If
and when the Restriction Period expires without a prior forfeiture of the
Restricted Stock subject to such Restriction Period, certificates for an
appropriate number of unrestricted shares of Stock shall be delivered to the
participant promptly (unless the Committee decides pursuant to Section 2(f) to
settle the award in cash).
 
(iii)           The
voting rights and/or dividend rights, if any, of the Restricted Stock award
shall be established by the Committee pursuant to Section 2(i).
 
SECTION
7. Deferred
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Deferred
Stock may be awarded either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other
awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the Plan. The
Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom and the time or times at
which Deferred Stock shall be awarded, the number of shares of Deferred Stock to
be awarded to any person, the duration of the period (the “Deferral Period”)
during which, and the conditions under which, receipt of the Stock will be
deferred, and the other terms and conditions of the award in addition to those
set forth in Section 7(b).  Awards of Deferred Stock may be subject to
the provisions of section 409A of the Code, and it is intended that any such
grant shall be made and administered in compliance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Deferred Stock upon the attainment of such
factors or criteria as the Committee shall determine, in its sole
discretion.
 
The
provisions of Deferred Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Deferred Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 7 shall be subject to
the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan, Deferred Stock awards may not be sold, assigned,
transferred, pledged or otherwise encumbered during the Deferral Period. At the
expiration of the Deferral Period (or the elective Deferral Period referred to
in Section 7(b)(iii), where applicable), stock certificates shall be delivered
to the participant, or his legal representative, in a number equal to the shares
covered by the Deferred Stock award (unless the Committee decides pursuant to
Section 2(f) to settle the award in cash).
 
(ii)           The
Committee may accelerate the vesting of all or any part of any Deferred Stock
award and/or waive the deferral limitations in whole or in part, based on
service and/or such other factors as the Committee may determine, in its sole
discretion.
 
(iii)           Deferral
of awards (or any installment thereof) shall not be permitted except in
conformance with Internal Revenue Service transitional guidance under section
409A of the Code that does not result in a violation of section 409A of the
Code, including Internal Revenue Service Notices 2005-1, 2006-67 and
2007-86.
 
(iv)           The
dividend rights, if any, of the Deferred Stock award established by the
Committee pursuant to Section 2(j).  Such rights shall be issued in
conformance with section 409A of the Code.
 
SECTION
8. Change
in Control Provisions.
 
(a)           Impact of Event. The
Committee may provide, at or after the date an Award is granted that,
notwithstanding any provisions of the Plan to the contrary, in the event of a
“Change in Control” (as defined in Section 8(b)) or “Potential Change in
Control” (as defined in section 8(c)):
 
(A)           Any
Stock Options awarded under the Plan not previously exercisable and vested shall
become fully exercisable and vested;
 
(B)           The
restrictions and deferral limitations applicable to any Restricted Stock and
Deferred Stock, in each case to the extent not already vested under the Plan,
shall lapse and such shares and awards shall be deemed fully vested;
and
 
(C)           The
value of all outstanding Awards to the extent vested may at the sole discretion
of the Committee at or after grant but prior to any Change in Control, be cashed
out on the basis of the “Change in Control Price” as defined in Section 8(d) as
of the date such Change in Control or Potential Change in Control is determined
to have occurred or such other date as the Committee may determine prior to the
Change in Control or Potential Change in Control, provided that payment of
awards subject to section 409A of the Code shall be made in a manner compliant
with section 409A.
 
(b)           Definition of “Change in
Control”.  For purposes of Section 8(a), a “Change in Control”
means the happening of any of the following:
 
(i)           When
any “person” as defined in section 3(a)(9) of the Exchange Act and as used in
sections 13(d) and 14(d) thereof, including a “group” as defined in section
13(d) of the Exchange Act but excluding the Company, any Subsidiary or any
employee benefit plan sponsored or maintained by the Company or any Subsidiary
(including any trustee of such plan acting as trustee), directly or indirectly,
becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act,
as amended from time to time), of securities of the Company representing fifteen
percent (15%) or more of the combined voting power of the Company’s then
outstanding securities;
 
(ii)           The
individuals who, as of December 31, 2008, constitute the Board (the “Incumbent
Board”) cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board;
provided, however, that any individual becoming a director subsequent to such
date whose election, or nomination for election by the Company’s shareholders,
was approved by a vote of at least a majority of the directors then comprising
the Incumbent Board shall be considered as though such individual were a member
of the Incumbent Board, but excluding, for this purpose, any such individual
whose initial assumption of office occurs as a result of an actual or threatened
election contest with respect to the election or removal of directors or other
actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or consents by or on behalf of a
person other than the Board; or
 
(iii)           Consummation
of a reorganization, merger or consolidation or sale or other disposition of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company or the acquisition of assets
of another corporation (a “Business Combination”), in each case, unless,
following such Business Combination: (A) all or substantially all of the
individuals and entities who were the beneficial owners, respectively, of the
then outstanding shares of Stock of the Company and the combined voting power of
the then outstanding voting securities of the Company entitled to vote generally
in the election of directors immediately prior to such Business Combination
beneficially own, directly or indirectly, more than sixty percent (60%) of,
respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock and the combined
voting power of the then outstanding voting securities entitled to vote
generally in the election of directors, as the case may be, of the corporation
resulting from such Business Combination (including, without limitation, a
corporation which as a result of such transaction owns the Company or all or
substantially all of the Company’s assets either directly or through one or more
subsidiaries); (B) no person (excluding any employee benefit plan (or related
trust) of the Company or such corporation resulting from such Business
Combination) beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, fifteen percent (15%) or
more of, respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination or the combined voting
power of the then outstanding voting securities of such corporation except to
the extent that such ownership existed prior to the Business Combination; and
(C) at least a majority of the members of the board of directors of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination were members of the
Incumbent Board at the time of the execution of the initial agreement, or of the
action of the Board, providing for such Business Combination; or
 
(iv)           Approval
by the shareholders of the Company of a complete liquidation or dissolution of
the Company.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 8(b) hereinabove, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or change in
effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial portion of the
assets of the Company, in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the
specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii)
or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
(c)           Definition of Potential Change in
Control.  For purposes of Section 8(a), a “Potential Change in
Control” means the happening of any one of the following:
 
(i)           The
approval by shareholders of an agreement by the Company, the consummation of
which would result in a Change in Control of the Company as defined in Section
8(b); or
 
(ii)           The
acquisition of beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any entity,
person or group (other than the Company or a Subsidiary or any Company employee
benefit plan (including any trustee of such plan acting as such trustee)) of
securities of the Company representing five percent (5%) or more of the combined
voting power of the Company’s outstanding securities and the adoption by the
Board of a resolution to the effect that a Potential Change in Control of the
Company has occurred for purposes of this Plan.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 8(c) hereinabove, a Potential Change in Control shall be
deemed to have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or
change in effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial
portion of the assets of the Company, as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the
specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii)
or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
(d)           Change in Control Price. For
the purposes of this Section 8, “Change in Control Price” means the highest
price per share paid in any transaction reported on the New York Stock Exchange
Composite Index, or paid or offered in any bona fide transaction related to a
potential or actual Change in Control of the Company at any time during the
sixty (60) day period immediately preceding the occurrence of the Change in
Control, in each case as determined by the Committee.
 
SECTION
9. Amendments
and Termination.
 
The Board
may amend, alter or discontinue the Plan, but no amendment, alteration or
discontinuation shall be made which would impair the rights of an optionee or
participant under an Award theretofore granted, without the optionee’s or
participant’s consent.
 
The
Committee may amend the terms of any Stock Option or other award theretofore
granted, prospectively or retroactively, but subject to Section 3 above, no such
amendment shall impair the rights of any holder without the holder’s
consent.
 
Subject
to the above provisions, the Board shall have broad authority to amend the Plan
to take into account changes in applicable securities and tax laws and
accounting rules, as well as other developments.
 
Notwithstanding
the above, no amendment shall be made that shall constitute an impermissible
acceleration of an award that is subject to section 409A of the Code and awards
subject to section 409A of the Code may be amended without participant consent
to the extent provided in Section 2 of this Plan.
 
SECTION
10. Unfunded
Status of Plan.
 
The Plan
is intended to constitute an “unfunded” plan for incentive and deferred
compensation. With respect to any payments not yet made to a participant or
optionee by the Company, nothing contained herein shall give any such
participant or optionee any rights that are greater than those of a general
creditor of the Company. In its sole discretion, the Committee may authorize the
creation of trusts or other arrangements to meet the obligations created under
the Plan to deliver Stock or payments in lieu of or with respect to awards
hereunder; provided, however, that unless the Committee otherwise determines
with the consent of the affected participant, the existence of such trusts or
other arrangements is consistent with the “unfunded” status of the
Plan.  Trusts or other arrangements so established shall be subject to
the limitations of section 409A(b) of the Code.
 
SECTION
11. General
Provisions.
 
(a)           The
Committee may require each person purchasing shares pursuant to a Stock Option
or other award under the Plan to represent to and agree with the Company in
writing that the optionee or participant is acquiring the shares without a view
to distribution thereof. The certificates for such shares may include any legend
that the Committee deems appropriate to reflect any restrictions on
transfer.
 
All
certificates for shares of Stock or other securities delivered under the Plan
shall be subject to such stock-transfer orders and other restrictions as the
Committee may deem advisable under the rules, regulations, and other
requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission, any stock exchange upon
which the Stock is then listed, and any applicable federal or state securities
law, and the Committee may cause a legend or legends to be put on any such
certificates to make appropriate reference to such restrictions.
 
(b)           Nothing
contained in this Plan shall prevent the Board from adopting other or additional
compensation arrangements, subject to stockholder approval if such approval is
required, and such arrangements may be either generally applicable or applicable
only in specific cases.
 
(c)           The
adoption of the Plan shall not confer upon any employee of the Company or any
Subsidiary or Affiliate any right to continued employment with the Company or a
Subsidiary or Affiliate, as the case may be, nor shall it interfere in any way
with the right of the Company or a Subsidiary or Affiliate to terminate the
employment of any of its employees at any time.
 
(d)           Except
as the participant and the Company may otherwise agree, no later than the date
as of which an amount first becomes includible in the gross income of the
participant for federal income tax purposes with respect to any award under the
Plan, the participant shall pay to the Company, or make arrangements
satisfactory to the Committee regarding the payment of, any federal, state, or
local taxes of any kind required by law to be withheld with respect to such
amount. Unless otherwise determined by the Committee, withholding obligations
may be settled with Stock, including Stock that is part of the award that gives
rise to the withholding requirement. The obligations of the Company under the
Plan shall be conditional on such payment or arrangements, and the Company and
its Subsidiaries or Affiliates shall, to the extent permitted by law, have the
right to deduct any such taxes from any payment of any kind otherwise due to the
participant.
 
(e)           The
actual or deemed reinvestment of dividends or dividend equivalents in additional
Restricted Stock (or in Deferred Stock or other types of Plan awards) at the
time of any dividend payment shall only be permissible if sufficient shares of
Stock are available under Section 3 for such reinvestment (taking into account
then outstanding Stock Options and other Plan awards).
 
(f)           The
Committee may permit a participant to postpone the delivery of Stock under any
award, including a Stock Option, under the Plan upon such terms and conditions
as the Committee shall determine, but, with respect to awards subject to section
409A of the Code, only in conformance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
(g)           The
Plan and all awards made and actions taken thereunder shall be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware.
 
(h)           The
recipient of an Award hereunder is responsible for ensuring that all applicable
taxes are paid when due. The Corporation and any Subsidiary or Affiliate reserve
the right to sell all or any part of an Award and apply the proceeds to the tax
obligation, or to withhold an amount equal to such tax obligation from the
recipient’s salary, wages or any other payments made to the recipient by a
Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
SECTION
12. Effective
Date of Plan.
 
As
amended and restated, the Plan shall be effective as of March 18, 2003, with
changes effected hereunder effective as of January 1, 2005.
 
SECTION
13. Term of Plan.
 
No Award
shall be granted pursuant to the Plan on or after the tenth anniversary of the
date of adoption of the Plan, but awards granted prior to such tenth anniversary
may extend beyond that date, in accordance with the terms of such
awards.
 



EX-10.151
63
ex10151.htm
EMPLOYEE STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex10151.htm







FIRST
AMENDMENT
 
TO
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
1994
DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
 
THIS
FIRST AMENDMENT TO AMR CORPORATION 1994 DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, is made
this 17th day of
November, 2008, by AMR Corporation (the “Company”).
 
PREAMBLE
 
The
Company established the AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, as
amended (the “Plan”) to enable the Company to attract, retain and motivate the
best qualified directors and to enhance a long-term mutuality of interest
between the directors and stockholders of the Company by providing the directors
with a direct economic interest in the Common Stock of the
Company.  Since the adoption of the Plan, section 409A of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), has been enacted and requires
amendment of the Plan.  Such required amendments are accomplished by
adoption of this instrument, which is effective as of January 1,
2005.  Except as amended by this instrument, the Plan shall remain in
full force and effect.
 
AMENDMENTS
 
1.           Section
2(e) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in ownership of the Company, or
change in effective control of the Company, or change in ownership of a
substantial portion of the Company’s assets, in each case as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such
purpose the specified percentages in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi)
and (vii) or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any
elective percentage.  The determination of the occurrence of a Change
in Control shall be made by the Board, consistent with the definition of such
term as contained in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
2.           Section
2(k) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, the term “Disability” shall mean
“Disability” as defined in section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.  Determination of Disability shall be made by the
Board consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor
guidance thereto.”
 
3.           Section
9(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“With
respect to any Deferred Share not vested as of December 31, 2004, such Deferred
Share may not be distributed until the later of any date specified above or a
date that is within thirty (30) days after the Eligible Director has a
“separation from service” within the meaning of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h)
or successor guidance thereto.”
 
4.           Section
9(c) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“This
Section 9(c) is inapplicable to any Deferred Share not vested on or before
December 31, 2004.”
 
5.           Section
13(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“Any
distribution on termination of the Plan shall be made only in a manner permitted
by Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix).”
 
This
First Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, and is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           Corporate
Secretary








EX-10.152
64
ex10152.htm
DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex10152.htm






 



 






 



FIRST
AMENDMENT
 
TO
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
1994
DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
 
THIS
FIRST AMENDMENT TO AMR CORPORATION 1994 DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, is made
this 17th day of
November, 2008, by AMR Corporation (the “Company”).
 
PREAMBLE
 
The
Company established the AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, as
amended (the “Plan”) to enable the Company to attract, retain and motivate the
best qualified directors and to enhance a long-term mutuality of interest
between the directors and stockholders of the Company by providing the directors
with a direct economic interest in the Common Stock of the
Company.  Since the adoption of the Plan, section 409A of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), has been enacted and requires
amendment of the Plan.  Such required amendments are accomplished by
adoption of this instrument, which is effective as of January 1,
2005.  Except as amended by this instrument, the Plan shall remain in
full force and effect.
 
AMENDMENTS
 
1.           Section
2(e) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in ownership of the Company, or
change in effective control of the Company, or change in ownership of a
substantial portion of the Company’s assets, in each case as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such
purpose the specified percentages in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi)
and (vii) or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any
elective percentage.  The determination of the occurrence of a Change
in Control shall be made by the Board, consistent with the definition of such
term as contained in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
2.           Section
2(k) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, the term “Disability” shall mean
“Disability” as defined in section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.  Determination of Disability shall be made by the
Board consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor
guidance thereto.”
 
3.           Section
9(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“With
respect to any Deferred Share not vested as of December 31, 2004, such Deferred
Share may not be distributed until the later of any date specified above or a
date that is within thirty (30) days after the Eligible Director has a
“separation from service” within the meaning of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h)
or successor guidance thereto.”
 
4.           Section
9(c) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“This
Section 9(c) is inapplicable to any Deferred Share not vested on or before
December 31, 2004.”
 
5.           Section
13(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“Any
distribution on termination of the Plan shall be made only in a manner permitted
by Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix).”
 
This
First Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, and is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           Corporate
Secretary













P:\069878\Director
Compensation Plans\Amended 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan Final
111708.doc
 



 



 






 






EX-12
65
ex12.htm
COMPUTATION OF RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES

ex12.htm







Exhibit
12

AMR
CORPORATION
Computation
of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
 (in
millions)








 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 
 

2005

 
 

2004

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Earnings:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Income
      (loss) before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting
      change

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
 504
 
 
$
 231
 
 
$
(857
)
 
$
(751
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Add:  Total
      fixed charges (per below)

 
 
1,631
 
 
 
1,828
 
 
 
1,945
 
 
 
1,846
 
 
 
1,755
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Less:  Interest
      capitalized

 
 
33
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
29
 
 
 
65
 
 
 
80
 



Total
      earnings (loss)

 
$
(473
)
 
$
2,312
 
 
$
2,147
 
 
$
924
 
 
$
924
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Fixed
      charges:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Interest

 
$
703
 
 
$
857
 
 
$
969
 
 
$
897
 
 
$
822
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Portion
      of rental expense representative of the interest factor

 
 
847
 
 
 
898
 
 
 
898
 
 
 
876
 
 
 
869
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Amortization
      of debt expense

 
 
81
 
 
 
73
 
 
 
78
 
 
 
73
 
 
 
64
 



Total
      fixed charges

 
$
1,631
 
 
$
1,828
 
 
$
1,945
 
 
$
1,846
 
 
$
1,755
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Ratio
      of earnings to fixed charges

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.26
 
 
 
1.10
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Coverage
      deficiency

 
$
2,104
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
922
 
 
$
831
 












EX-21
66
ex21.htm
SUBSIDIARIES

ex21.htm





                             
Exhibit
21        
AMR
CORPORATION
SUBSIDIARIES
OF THE REGISTRANT
As
of December 31, 2008
 
Subsidiary
companies of the Registrant are listed below.  With respect to the
companies named, all voting securities are owned directly or indirectly by the
Registrant, except where otherwise indicated.
 
              State or
     Sovereign
Power 
Name of
Subsidiary                                          of
Incorporation
 
Subsidiaries
included in the Registrant’s consolidated financial statements
 




American
      Airlines, Inc.
AA 2002 Class C Certificate
      Corporation
AA 2002 Class D Certificate
      Corporation I
AA 2003-1 Class C Certificate
      Corporation
AA 2003-1 Class D Certificate
      Corporation
AA 2004-1 Class B Note
      Corporation
AA 2005-1 Class C Certificate
      Corporation
AA Real Estate Holding GP
      LLC
AA Real Estate Holding
      L.P.
Admirals Club, Inc.
      (Massachusetts only)
American Airlines de Mexico,
      S.A.
American Airlines de Venezuela,
      S.A.
American Airlines Marketing
      Services LLC
American Airlines Realty (NYC)
      Holdings, Inc.
American Airlines Vacations
      LLC
American Aviation Supply
      LLC
Packcall Limited
Texas Aero Engine Services,
      L.L.C, dba TAESL*


Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Massachusetts
Mexico
Venezuela
Virginia
New
      York
Delaware
Delaware
United
      Kingdom
Delaware




Americas
      Ground Services, Inc.
Aerodespachos Colombia, S.A.
      AERCOL S.A.
Caribbean Dispatch Services,
      Ltd.
American Airlines, Division de
      Servicios Aeroportuarios (R.D.), S.A.(DSA)
International Ground Services,
      S.A. de C.V.


Delaware
Colombia
St.
      Lucia
Dominican
      Republic
Mexico




AMR
      Eagle Holding Corporation
American Eagle Airlines,
      Inc.
Eagle Aviation Services,
      Inc.
Executive Airlines,
      Inc.


Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware




Avion
      Assurance Ltd.


Bermuda




PMA
      Investment Subsidiary, Inc.
SC
      Investment, Inc.


Delaware
Delaware





  *Entities
with 50% or less ownership.



EX-23
67
ex23.htm
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUTING FIRM

ex23.htm







 
Exhibit 23      



CONSENT
OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM


We
consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statements (Form S-8
No. 2-68366, Form S-8 No. 333-19325, Form S-8 No. 33-27866, Form S-8 No.
33-60725, Form S-8 No. 333-13751, Form S-8 No. 33-60727, Form S-8 No. 333-56947,
Form S-8 No. 333-70239, Form S-8 No. 333-104611, Form S-3 No. 33-46325, Form S-3
No. 33-52121, Form S-3 No. 333-68211, Form S-3 No. 333-84292-01, Form S-3 No.
333-110760 and Form S-3 No. 333-136563-01) of AMR Corporation, and in the
related Prospectuses, of our reports dated February 18, 2009, with respect to
the consolidated financial statements and schedule of AMR Corporation and the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting of AMR
Corporation,  included in this Annual Report (Form  10-K)
for the year ended December 31, 2008.






/s/  ERNST & YOUNG
LLP


Dallas,
Texas
February
18, 2009







EX-31.1
68
ex311.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

ex311.htm







                  
Exhibit
31.1      


I, Gerard
J. Arpey, certify that:





1.  


I
      have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of AMR
      Corporation;









2.  


Based
      on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a
      material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
      statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements
      were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
      report;









3.  


Based
      on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information
      included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
      financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
      registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this
      report;









4.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for
      establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
      defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal
      control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
      13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
  have:









(a)  


Designed
      such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure
      controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
      that material information relating to the registrant, including its
      consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
      entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being
      prepared;









(b)  


Designed
      such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal
      control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
      provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
      reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
      purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
      principles;









(c)  


Evaluated
      the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures
      and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
      the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period
      covered by this report based on such evaluation;
  and









(d)  


Disclosed
      in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over
      financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
      fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
      annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
      materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial
      reporting; and









5.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on
      our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
      to the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's
      board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
      functions):









(a)  


All
      significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
      operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
      reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record,
      process, summarize and report financial information;
  and









(b)  


Any
      fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
      employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
      over financial reporting.







Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Gerard J.
Arpey                                                   
Gerard J. Arpey
Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer



EX-31.2
69
ex312.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

ex312.htm







                         
Exhibit
31.2       


I, Thomas
W. Horton, certify that:





1.  


I
      have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of AMR
      Corporation;









2.  


Based
      on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a
      material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
      statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements
      were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
      report;









3.  


Based
      on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information
      included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
      financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
      registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this
      report;









4.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for
      establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
      defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal
      control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
      13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
  have:









(a)  


Designed
      such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure
      controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
      that material information relating to the registrant, including its
      consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
      entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being
      prepared;









(b)  


Designed
      such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal
      control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
      provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
      reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
      purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
      principles;









(c)  


Evaluated
      the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures
      and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
      the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period
      covered by this report based on such evaluation;
  and









(d)  


Disclosed
      in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over
      financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
      fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
      annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
      materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial
      reporting; and









5.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on
      our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
      to the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's
      board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
      functions):









(a)  


All
      significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
      operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
      reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record,
      process, summarize and report financial information;
  and









(b)  


Any
      fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
      employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
      over financial reporting.







Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Thomas W.
Horton
Thomas W. Horton
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer



EX-32
70
ex32.htm
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906

ex32.htm







 
Exhibit
32     

AMR
CORPORATION
Certification
Pursuant
to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
(Subsections
(a) and (b) of Section 1350, Chapter 63 of Title 18, United States
Code)


Pursuant
to section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of
section 1350, chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code), each of the
undersigned officers of AMR Corporation, a Delaware corporation (the Company),
does hereby certify, to such officer’s knowledge, that:

The
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (the Form 10-K)
of the Company fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and information contained in the Form 10-K
fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results
of operations of the Company.

Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Gerard J.
Arpey                                                              
Gerard J. Arpey
Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer

Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Thomas W.
Horton
Thomas W. Horton
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer



The
foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of section 1350, chapter 63
of title 18, United States Code) and is not being filed as part of the Form 10-K
or as a separate disclosure document.



-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 JySTeP6yRsFer0hga1NIietWx5p7uCH7icdIfChMOue1x1Ox6MCwTZxlLVk0EjMJ
 474mw+ne9gH6aO8VvJ8osg==

0000006201-09-000009.txt : 20090219
0000006201-09-000009.hdr.sgml : 20090219
20090219160727
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0000006201-09-000009
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		70
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	20081231
FILED AS OF DATE:		20090219
DATE AS OF CHANGE:		20090219

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			AMR CORP
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000006201
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED [4512]
		IRS NUMBER:				751825172
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			DE
		FISCAL YEAR END:			0120

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K
		SEC ACT:		1934 Act
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	001-08400
		FILM NUMBER:		09621784

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		4333 AMON CARTER BLVD
		CITY:			FORT WORTH
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			76155
		BUSINESS PHONE:		8179631234

	MAIL ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		4333 AMON CARTER BLVD
		CITY:			FORT WORTH
		STATE:			TX
		ZIP:			75261-9616


10-K
1
ar120810k.htm
AMR CORPORATION

ar120810k.htm







United
States
Securities
and Exchange Commission
            
Washington, D.C.
20549           

Form
10-K

þ  Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the
fiscal year ended December 31, 2008
 
 ¨  Transition
Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934
 
Commission
File Number:  1-8400
AMR
Corporation
(Exact
name of registrant as specified in its charter)




Delaware

 
      

75-1825172




(State
      or other jurisdiction of
incorporation
      or organization)

 
      

(IRS
      Employer
Identification
      Number)




4333
Amon Carter Blvd.
Fort
Worth, Texas 76155
(Address
of principal executive offices, including zip code)

(817)
963-1234
(Registrant’s
telephone number, including area code)_____________________________
Securities
registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 




Title
      of Each Class

 
      

Name
      of Exchange on Which Registered




Common
      Stock, $1 par value per share

 
      

New
      York Stock Exchange




9.00%
      Debentures due 2016

 
      

New
      York Stock Exchange




7.875%
      Public Income Notes due 2039

 
      

New
      York Stock Exchange




 
Securities
registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
            
        
 None                          

Indicate
by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in
Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
þ
Yes    ¨
No
 
Indicate
by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to
Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.
¨
Yes    þ
No
 
Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be
filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required
to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days.   þ  Yes   ¨  No
 
Indicate by check mark if
disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not
contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the registrant’s
knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by
reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form
10-K.   o
 
Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an
accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company.  See definition of “accelerated filer,” “large accelerated
filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange
Act.
 
Large Accelerated Filer
þ                                                                                     Accelerated
Filer ¨
Non-accelerated Filer ¨                                                                       
              Smaller
reporting company ¨
 
Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule
12b-2 of the Act).  ¨
Yes  þ
No
 
The
aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the
registrant as of June 30, 2008, was approximately $1.3 billion.  As of
February 11, 2009, 279,005,677 shares of the registrant’s common stock were
outstanding.

DOCUMENTS
INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III
of this Form 10-K incorporates by reference certain information from the Proxy
Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be held May 20,
2009.

 






 







PART
      I





ITEM
1.                 BUSINESS

AMR
Corporation (AMR or the Company) was incorporated in October
1982.  AMR’s operations fall almost entirely in the airline
industry.  AMR's principal subsidiary, American Airlines, Inc.
(American), was founded in 1934.  At the end of 2008, American
provided scheduled jet service to approximately 150 destinations throughout
North America, the Caribbean, Latin America, Europe and Asia.

American, AMR Eagle Holding Corporation (AMR
Eagle) and the
AmericanConnection® airlines serve 250 cities in 40 countries with, on average,
more than 3,400 daily flights. The combined network fleet numbers approximately
900 aircraft.  American Airlines is also a founding member of
oneworld® Alliance, which enables member
airlines to offer their customers more services and benefits than any member
airline can provide individually. These services include a broader route
network, opportunities to earn and redeem frequent flyer miles across the
combined oneworld network and more airport
lounges.  Together, oneworld members serve nearly 700
destinations in over 150 countries, with 8,500 daily departures. American is also one of the largest
scheduled air freight carriers in the world, providing a wide range of freight
and mail services to shippers throughout its system onboard American’s passenger
fleet.

AMR
Eagle, a wholly-owned subsidiary of AMR, owns two regional airlines which do
business as "American Eagle” – American Eagle Airlines, Inc. and Executive
Airlines, Inc. (Executive) (collectively, the American Eagle
carriers).  American also contracts with two independently owned
regional airlines, which do business as “AmericanConnection” (the
AmericanConnection® carriers). The American Eagle carriers and the
AmericanConnection® carriers provide connecting service from ten of American's
high-traffic cities to smaller markets throughout the United States, Canada,
Mexico and the Caribbean.

The AMR
Eagle fleet is operated to feed passenger traffic to American pursuant to a
capacity purchase agreement between American and AMR Eagle under which American
receives all passenger revenue from flights and pays AMR Eagle a fee for each
flight.  The capacity purchase agreement reflects what the Company
believes are current market rates received by other regional carriers for
similar flying.  Amounts paid to AMR Eagle under the capacity purchase
agreement are for various operating expenses of AMR Eagle, such as crew
expenses, maintenance and aircraft ownership, some of which are calculated based
on specific operating statistics (e.g. block hours, departures) and others of
which are fixed monthly amounts.  This capacity purchase agreement was
renewed in July 2008.  As of December 31, 2008, AMR Eagle operated
over 1,400 daily departures, offering scheduled passenger service to over 150
destinations in North America, Mexico and the Caribbean.  On a
separate company basis, AMR Eagle reported $2.5 billion in revenue and $30
million of income before income taxes in 2008.  However, this
historical financial information is not indicative of what AMR Eagle’s future
results of operations, financial position and cash flows might be if AMR Eagle
was a stand-alone entity.
 
Recent
Events

The
Company recorded a net loss of $2.1 billion in 2008 compared to net earnings of
$504 million in 2007.  These results reflect a dramatic year-over-year
increase in fuel prices from an average of $2.13 per gallon in 2007 to an
average of $3.03 per gallon in 2008.   Fuel expense was the
Company’s largest single expense category and the fuel price increase resulted
in $2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel expense in 2008 (based on the
year-over-year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied by gallons
consumed).  In addition, the Company paid 11.7 cents more per gallon
in 2007 than in 2006, which drove a $268 million negative impact to fuel expense
in 2007.  Although fuel prices have abated considerably from the
record prices recorded in July 2008, fuel prices remain
volatile.  Fuel price volatility, additional increases in the price of
fuel, and/or disruptions in the supply of fuel would further adversely affect
the Company’s financial condition and its results of operations.

The
significant rise in fuel price was partially offset by higher unit revenues
(passenger revenue per available seat mile).  Mainline passenger unit
revenues increased 7.3 percent in 2008 due to an 8.6 percent increase in
passenger yield (passenger revenue per passenger mile) partially offset by a 0.9
point load factor decrease compared to 2007.  Although passenger yield
showed year-over-year improvement, passenger yield remains essentially flat with
2000 levels, despite cumulative inflation of approximately 25 percent over the
same time frame.



 



 






 



In
addition, the Company’s 2008 operating results were impacted by three special
items:





·  


In
      the second quarter, the Company announced capacity reductions due to
      unprecedented high fuel costs and the other challenges facing the
      industry.  In connection with these capacity reductions, the
      Company concluded that a triggering event had occurred, requiring that
      fixed assets be tested for impairment.   As a result of
      this test, the Company concluded the carrying values of its McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80 and the Embraer RJ-135 aircraft fleets were no longer
      recoverable. Consequently, the 2008 results include an impairment charge
      of $1.1 billion to write these and certain related long-lived assets down
      to their estimated fair values.  Also in connection with these
      capacity reductions, the Company recorded $71 million in expense for
      employee severance costs and a $33 million expense related to the
      grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft prior to lease
      expiration.  These charges are described in Note 2 to the
      consolidated financial statements.









·  


The
      Company completed the sale of American Beacon Advisors (American Beacon)
      receiving total proceeds of $442 million and realizing a net gain of $432
      million.  This transaction is described in Note 14 to the
      consolidated financial statements.









·  


AMR
      recorded a settlement charge totaling $103 million related to lump sum
      distributions from the Company’s defined benefit pension plans to pilots
      who retired.  Pilot retirements resulted in $917 million in
      total lump sum payments to pilot retirees.  The charge is
      further described in Note 10 to the consolidated financial
      statements.





In August
2008, AMR retired, by purchasing with cash, $75 million of the $300 million
principal amount of the 4.25 percent senior convertible notes due 2023 (the 4.25
Notes).  In September 2008, the remaining holders of the 4.25 Notes
exercised their elective put rights and the Company purchased and retired these
notes at a price equal to 100 percent of their principal amount, totaling $225
million.  Under the terms of the 4.25 Notes, the Company had the
option to pay the purchase price with cash, stock, or a combination of cash and
stock, and the Company elected to pay for the 4.25 Notes solely with
cash.

AMR
continues to take steps to strengthen its balance sheet, and in the third
quarter of 2008 issued 27.1 million shares of common stock generating net
proceeds of $294 million.  The Company reduced long-term debt and
capital lease obligations (including current maturities) by $185 million during
the year and ended the year with $3.1 billion in unrestricted cash and
short-term investments and $459 million in restricted cash and short-term
investments.  In 2008, American also raised approximately $500 million
under a loan secured by aircraft, due in installments through 2015, and raised
approximately $424 million utilizing various transactions including additional
loans secured by aircraft and sale leasebacks of certain aircraft, including
regional aircraft.

In 2008,
American entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing
arrangements with the UK carrier British Airways and the Spanish carrier Iberia,
providing for commercial cooperation by the carriers on flights between North
America (consisting of the United States, Canada and Mexico) and Europe
(consisting of the European Union, Switzerland and Norway) and
beyond.  The agreement contemplates the pooling and sharing of certain
revenues and costs on transatlantic flights, expanded codesharing on each
other’s flights, enhanced frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in
the areas of planning, marketing and certain operations.  The
agreement was signed in connection with an application to the U.S. Department of
Transportation by the carriers for antitrust immunity to permit global
cooperation.  The application also included the Finnish carrier,
Finnair, and the Jordanian carrier, Royal Jordanian.  If granted
(which cannot be assured), antitrust immunity would permit the five carriers,
all of whom are members of the oneworld airline alliance, to
deepen cooperation on a bilateral and multilateral
basis.  Implementation of the joint business agreement and related
arrangements is subject to conditions, including various U.S. and foreign
regulatory approvals, successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and
commercial arrangements, and other approvals.  Agencies from which
regulatory approvals must be obtained may impose requirements or limitations as
a condition of granting such approvals, such as requiring divestiture of routes,
gates, slots or other assets.

The
Company continued its fleet renewal strategy during 2008 as it entered into
amendments to its 737-800 purchase agreement with the Boeing
Company.   Giving effect to the amendments and considering the
impact of delays caused by the recent machinist strike at Boeing, the Company is
now committed to take delivery of a total of 29 737-800 aircraft in 2009, 39
737-800 aircraft in 2010 and eight 737-800 aircraft in 2011.  These
orders are in addition to eleven 737-800 aircraft and seven Boeing 777 aircraft
scheduled to be delivered in 2013 – 2016.


















The
Company also entered into a new purchase agreement with Boeing for the
acquisition of 42 Boeing 787-9 aircraft.  The Boeing 787-9
purchase agreement contains certain contingency provisions, including provisions
which allow American to cancel the contract under certain circumstances, which
are described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources subsection of Item
7.  “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations”.
 
The
Company’s ability to return to profitability and its ability to continue to fund
its obligations on an ongoing basis will depend on a number of factors, many of
which are largely beyond the Company’s control.  Certain risk factors
that affect the Company’s business and financial results are discussed in the
Risk Factors listed in Item 1A.  In addition, most of the Company’s
largest domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have filed for
bankruptcy in recent years and have used this process to significantly reduce
contractual labor and other costs.  In order to remain competitive and
to improve its financial condition, the Company must continue to take steps to
generate additional revenues and to reduce its costs.  Although the
Company has a number of initiatives underway to address its cost and revenue
challenges, the ultimate success of these initiatives is not known at this time
and cannot be assured.  It will be very difficult for the Company to
continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis and return to
profitability, if the overall industry revenue environment does not improve
substantially and if fuel prices were to increase and persist for an extended
period at high levels.

Competition

Domestic Air
Transportation   The domestic airline industry is fiercely
competitive.  Currently, any U.S. air carrier deemed fit by the U.S.
Department of Transportation (DOT) is free to operate scheduled passenger
service between any two points within the U.S. and its
possessions.  Most major air carriers have developed hub-and-spoke
systems and schedule patterns in an effort to maximize the revenue potential of
their service.  American operates five hubs: Dallas/Fort Worth (DFW),
Chicago O'Hare, Miami, St. Louis and San Juan, Puerto Rico.  United
Air Lines (United) also has a hub operation at Chicago O'Hare.

The
American Eagle® carriers increase the number of markets the Company serves by
providing connections at American’s hubs and certain other major airports –
Boston, Los Angeles, Raleigh/Durham and New York’s LaGuardia (LGA) and John F.
Kennedy International (JFK) Airports.  The AmericanConnection®
carriers provide connecting service to American through St.
Louis.  American's competitors also own or have marketing agreements
with regional carriers which provide similar services at their major hubs and
other locations.

On most
of its domestic non-stop routes, the Company faces competing service from at
least one, and sometimes more than one, domestic airline including: AirTran
Airways (Air Tran), Alaska Airlines (Alaska), Continental Airlines
(Continental), Delta Air Lines (including Northwest Airlines) (Delta), Frontier
Airlines, JetBlue Airways (JetBlue), Southwest Airlines (Southwest), United, US
Airways, Virgin America Airlines and their affiliated regional
carriers.  Competition is even greater between cities that require a
connection, where the major airlines compete via their respective
hubs.  In addition, the Company faces competition on some of its
connecting routes from carriers operating point-to-point service on such
routes.  The Company also competes with all-cargo and charter carriers
and, particularly on shorter segments, ground and rail
transportation.  On all of its routes, pricing decisions are affected,
in large part, by the need to meet competition from other airlines.

Most of
the Company’s largest domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have
reorganized under the protection of Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code
(Chapter 11) in recent years.  It is possible that one or more of our
competitors may seek to reorganize in or out of Chapter
11.  Successful reorganizations present the Company with competitors
with significantly lower operating costs derived from renegotiated labor, supply
and financing contracts.

International Air
Transportation   In addition to its extensive domestic
service, the Company provides international service to the Caribbean, Canada,
Latin America, Europe and Asia.  The Company's operating revenues from
foreign operations were approximately 40 percent of the Company’s total
operating revenues in 2008, and 37 percent of the Company’s total operating
revenues in both 2007 and 2006.  Additional information about the
Company's foreign operations is included in Note 14 to the consolidated
financial statements.



 



 






 



In
providing international air transportation, the Company competes with foreign
investor-owned carriers, foreign state-owned carriers and U.S. airlines that
have been granted authority to provide scheduled passenger and cargo service
between the U.S. and various overseas locations.  In general, carriers
that have the greatest ability to seamlessly connect passengers to and from
markets beyond the nonstop city pair have a competitive advantage.  In
some cases, however, foreign governments limit U.S. air carriers' rights to
carry passengers beyond designated gateway cities in foreign
countries.  To improve access to each other's markets, various U.S.
and foreign air carriers – including American – have established marketing
relationships with other airlines and rail companies.  American
currently has marketing relationships with Air Pacific, Air Tahiti Nui, Alaska
Airlines, British Airways, Brussels Airlines, Cathay Pacific, China Eastern
Airlines, Dragonair, Deutsche Bahn German Rail, EL AL, EVA Air, Finnair, Gulf
Air, Hawaiian Airlines, Iberia, Japan Airlines, Jet Airways, LAN (includes LAN
Airlines, LAN Argentina, LAN Ecuador and LAN Peru), Malév Hungarian Airlines,
Mexicana, Qantas Airways, Royal Jordanian, SNCF French Rail and Vietnam
Airlines.

American
is also a founding member of the oneworld alliance, which
includes British Airways, Cathay Pacific, Finnair, Lan Airlines, Iberia, Qantas,
Japan Airlines, Malév Hungarian, Dragonair, and Royal
Jordanian.   Mexicana Airlines has accepted an invitation to join
oneworld and formal entry into the alliance is anticipated in
2009.  The oneworld alliance links the
networks of the member carriers to enhance customer service and smooth
connections to the destinations served by the alliance, including linking the
carriers' frequent flyer programs and access to the carriers' airport lounge
facilities.  Several of American's major competitors are members of
marketing/operational alliances that enjoy antitrust
immunity.  American and British Airways, the largest members of the
oneworld alliance, are
restricted in their relationship because they lack antitrust
immunity.  They are, therefore, at a competitive disadvantage
vis-à-vis other alliances that have antitrust immunity.

In 2008,
American entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing
arrangements with British Airways and Iberia providing for commercial
cooperation by the carriers on flights between North America and Europe and
beyond.  The agreement was signed in connection with an application to
the U.S. Department of Transportation by the three carriers, and Finnair and
Royal Jordanian, for antitrust immunity to permit global
cooperation.  If granted (which cannot be assured), antitrust immunity
will permit the five carriers, all of whom are members of the oneworld airline alliance, to
deepen cooperation on a bilateral and multilateral basis.

Price
Competition   The airline industry is characterized by
substantial and intense price competition. Fare discounting by competitors has
historically had a negative effect on the Company’s financial results because
the Company is generally required to match competitors' fares, as failing to
match would provide even less revenue due to customers’ price
sensitivity.

In recent
years, a number of low-cost carriers (LCCs) have entered the domestic
market.  Several major airlines, including the Company, have
implemented efforts to lower their costs since lower cost structures enable
airlines to offer lower fares.  In addition, several air carriers have
recently reorganized under Chapter 11, including United, Delta and US
Airways.  These cost reduction efforts and bankruptcy reorganizations
have allowed carriers to decrease operating costs.  In the past, lower
cost structures have generally resulted in fare reductions.  If fare
reductions are not offset by increases in passenger traffic, changes in the mix
of traffic that improve yields (passenger revenue per passenger mile) and/or
cost reductions, the Company’s operating results will be negatively
impacted.

Regulation

General   The
Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, as amended, eliminated most domestic economic
regulation of passenger and freight transportation.  However, the DOT
and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) still exercise certain regulatory
authority over air carriers.  The DOT maintains jurisdiction over the
approval of international codeshare agreements, international route authorities
and certain consumer protection and competition matters, such as advertising,
denied boarding compensation and baggage liability.

The FAA
regulates flying operations generally, including establishing standards for
personnel, aircraft and certain security measures.  As part of that
oversight, the FAA has implemented a number of requirements that the Company has
incorporated and is incorporating into its maintenance programs.  The
Company is progressing toward the completion of over 200 airworthiness
directives including Boeing fuel tank safety directives, Boeing 757 and Boeing
767 pylon improvements, McDonnell Douglas MD-80 over-wing frame and aft pressure
bulkhead improvements, Boeing 737 aft pressure bulkhead improvements and Airbus
A300 fuselage structural improvements.  Based on its current
implementation schedule, the Company expects to be in compliance with the
applicable requirements within the required time periods.


















 
The
Department of Justice (DOJ) has jurisdiction over airline antitrust
matters.  The U.S. Postal Service has jurisdiction over certain
aspects of the transportation of mail and related services.  Labor
relations in the air transportation industry are regulated under the Railway
Labor Act, which vests in the National Mediation Board certain functions with
respect to disputes between airlines and labor unions relating to union
representation and collective bargaining agreements.
 
On
December 21, 2007, a New York federal judge
dismissed the Air Transport Association‘s (ATA) challenge to a recently enacted
New York law requiring airlines to provide certain services to onboard
passengers whose flights are delayed on the ground prior to takeoff for more
than three hours.  The ATA appealed the dismissal of the
challenge.  The Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed and ordered
the District Court to enter judgment for the ATA on the grounds that the
legislation was preempted by federal law.  The law, which was briefly
in effect, was declared invalid.
 

International   International
air transportation is subject to extensive government regulation. The Company's
operating authority in international markets is subject to aviation agreements
between the U.S. and the respective countries or governmental authorities (such
as the European Union), and in some cases, fares and schedules require the
approval of the DOT and/or the relevant foreign
governments.  Moreover, alliances with international carriers may be
subject to the jurisdiction and regulations of various foreign
agencies.  Bilateral agreements between the U.S. and various foreign
governments of countries served by the Company are periodically subject to
renegotiation.  Changes in U.S. or foreign government aviation
policies could result in the alteration or termination of such agreements,
diminish the value of route authorities, or otherwise adversely affect the
Company's international operations. In addition, at some foreign airports, an
air carrier needs slots (landing and take-off authorizations) before the air
carrier can introduce new service or increase existing service.  The
availability of such slots is not assured and the inability of the Company to
obtain and retain needed slots could therefore inhibit its efforts to compete in
certain international markets.

In April
2007, the United States and the European Union (EU) approved an “open skies” air
services agreement that provides airlines from the United States and EU member
states open access to each other’s markets, with freedom of pricing and
unlimited rights to fly beyond the United States and any airport in the EU
including London’s Heathrow Airport.  The provisions of the agreement
took effect on March 30, 2008.  Under the agreement, every U.S. and EU
airline is authorized to operate between airports in the United States and
Heathrow.  Notwithstanding the open skies agreement, Heathrow is a
slot-controlled airport.  Only three airlines besides American were
previously allowed to provide service to Heathrow.  The agreement has
resulted in the Company facing increased competition in serving Heathrow, where
the Company has lost market share.  In addition, the Company is facing
additional competition in other European markets.  See Item 1A, Risk
Factors, and Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.

Security   In
November 2001, the Aviation and Transportation Security Act (ATSA) was enacted
in the United States.  The ATSA created a new government agency, the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA), which is part of the Department of
Homeland Security and is responsible for aviation security.  The ATSA
mandates that the TSA provide for the screening of all passengers and property,
including U.S. mail, cargo, carry-on and checked baggage, and other articles
that will be carried aboard a passenger aircraft. The ATSA also provides for
security in flight decks of aircraft and requires federal air marshals to be
present on certain flights.

Effective
February 1, 2002, the ATSA imposed a $2.50 per enplanement security service fee,
which is being collected by the air carriers and submitted to the government to
pay for these enhanced security measures. Additionally, air carriers are
annually required to submit to the government an amount equal to what the air
carriers paid for screening passengers and property in 2000.  In
recent years, the government has sought to increase both of these fees under
spending proposals for the Department of Homeland Security. American and other
carriers have announced their opposition to these proposals as there is no
assurance that any increase in fees could be passed on to
customers.

Airline
Fares   Airlines are permitted to establish their own
domestic fares without governmental regulation. The DOT maintains authority over
certain international fares, rates and charges, but applies this authority on a
limited basis.  In addition, international fares and rates are
sometimes subject to the jurisdiction of the governments of the foreign
countries which the Company serves.  While air carriers are required
to file and adhere to international fare and rate tariffs, substantial
commissions, fare overrides and discounts to travel agents, brokers and
wholesalers characterize many international markets.


 



 






 



Airport Access 
 Historically, the FAA designated JFK, LGA and Washington Reagan
airports as high-density traffic airports.  The high-density rule limited
the number of Instrument Flight Rule operations - take-offs and landings -
permitted per hour and required that a “take-off/landing slot right” support
each operation.  The high density rule was repealed for JFK and LGA;
however both airports remain subject to operating restrictions.

In order
to remedy congestion at LGA due to elimination of slot restrictions, the FAA, in
2007, placed caps on total operations and required carriers at LGA to hold
operating authorizations.  In January 2009, the FAA announced a
voluntary program at LGA aimed at reducing hourly scheduled operations at LGA
from 75 to 71, which is expected to help ease congestion and delay without
materially affecting carrier operations.

In
December 2007, the United States Department of Transportation reached an
agreement with domestic airlines to ease congestion at JFK by shifting the
timing of certain flights.  Such re-timing has not had a significant
impact on the Company’s flights to or from JFK. 

In late
2008, the FAA issued new rules for carriers operating at LGA, JFK and Newark
that would fundamentally change the manner in which operating authorizations are
held and distributed at those airports.  Every departure and landing would
require an authorization and existing carriers would be requested to reduce
service to provide authorizations for auction to other carriers without
increasing total airport operations.  The Company, along with numerous
other carriers and interested parties, opposed adoption of these
rules.  Immediately after the rules were issued, the ATA and others
petitioned for judicial review in the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit challenging the rules and seeking a stay
(preliminary injunction) against their implementation.  The court granted
the stay motion, thus blocking the rules from taking effect, pending the court’s
ultimate decision on the merits.  Following the change in
Administrations on January 20, 2009, the ATA submitted a letter to the new
Secretary of Transportation urging that the rules be withdrawn.  If
the DOT does not withdraw the rules, or if the court challenge is unsuccessful,
the new rules could require the Company to alter the routes and services it
currently operates at LGA, JFK and Newark with potentially material adverse
effects.

In 2006,
the FAA issued an order requiring that carriers hold arrival authorizations to
land during certain hours at Chicago O’Hare.  That order limits the
purchase or sale of arrival authorizations. The Company has not experienced any
significant adverse impact from this order.  In addition, the DOT is
considering imposing a schedule reduction order at Newark (separately from the
FAA action above), which could include slot controls at that airport.  The
Company does not anticipate being materially affected if such an order is
imposed.

The
high-density rule remains in effect at Washington Reagan.  Legislation
has been introduced to abolish the perimeter rule at that airport, which (with
exceptions) limits nonstop flights to a distance of 1,250 miles.  Some
foreign airports, including Heathrow, a major European destination for American,
also require slot allocations. 

Although
the Company is constrained by slots, it currently has sufficient slot
authorizations to operate its existing flights.  However, there is no
assurance that the Company will be able to retain or obtain slots in the future
to expand its operations or change its schedules because, among other factors,
slot allocations are subject to changes in government policies.

In 2006,
the Wright Amendment Reform Act of 2006 (the Act) became law.  The Act
is based on an agreement by the cities of Dallas and Fort Worth, Texas, DFW
International Airport, Southwest, and the Company to modify the Wright
Amendment, which authorizes certain flight operations at Dallas Love Field
within defined geographic areas.  Among other things, the Act
eventually eliminates domestic geographic restrictions on operations while
limiting the maximum number of gates at Love Field.  The Company
believes the Act is a pragmatic resolution of the issues related to the Wright
Amendment and the use of Love Field.



 



 






 



Environmental
Matters   The Company is subject to various laws and
government regulations concerning environmental matters and employee safety and
health in the U.S. and other countries.  U.S. federal laws that have a
particular impact on the Company include the Airport Noise and Capacity Act of
1990 (ANCA), the Clean Air Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the
Clean Water Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA or the Superfund
Act).  Certain operations of the Company are also subject to the
oversight of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) concerning
employee safety and health matters.  The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), OSHA, and other federal agencies have been authorized to
promulgate regulations that have an impact on the Company's
operations.  In addition to these federal activities, various states
have been delegated certain authorities under the aforementioned federal
statutes.  Many state and local governments have adopted environmental
and employee safety and health laws and regulations, some of which are similar
to or stricter than federal requirements.

The ANCA
recognizes the rights of airport operators with noise problems to implement
local noise abatement programs so long as they do not interfere unreasonably
with interstate or foreign commerce or the national air transportation
system.  Authorities in several cities have promulgated aircraft noise
reduction programs, including the imposition of nighttime
curfews.  The ANCA generally requires FAA approval of local noise
restrictions on aircraft.  While the Company has had sufficient
scheduling flexibility to accommodate local noise restrictions imposed to date,
the Company’s operations could be adversely affected if locally-imposed
regulations become more restrictive or widespread.

Many
aspects of the Company’s operations are subject to increasingly stringent
environmental regulations.  Concerns about climate change and greenhouse
gas emissions, in particular, may result in the imposition of additional
legislation or regulation. For example, the EU recently approved measures that
impose emissions limits on airlines with operations to, from or within the EU as
part of an emissions trading system beginning in 2012.  The Company is
currently assessing the potential costs of the EU measures.  Such
legislative or regulatory action by the U.S. or foreign governments currently or
in the future may adversely affect the Company’s business and financial
results.

The
environmental laws to which the Company is subject include those related to
responsibility for potential soil and groundwater contamination.  The
Company is conducting investigation and remediation activities to address soil
and groundwater conditions at several sites, including airports and maintenance
bases.  The Company anticipates that the ongoing costs of such
activities will be immaterial.  The Company has also been named as a
potentially responsible party (PRP) at certain Superfund sites.  The
Company’s alleged volumetric contributions at such sites are small in comparison
to total contributions of all PRPs and the Company expects that any future
payments of its share of costs at such sites will be immaterial.

Labor

The
airline business is labor intensive.  Wages, salaries and benefits
represented approximately 26 percent of the Company’s consolidated operating
expenses for the year ended December 31, 2008.  The average full-time
equivalent number of employees of the Company’s subsidiaries for the year ended
December 31, 2008 was 84,100.

The
majority of these employees are represented by labor unions and covered by
collective bargaining agreements.  Relations with such labor
organizations are governed by the Railway Labor Act (RLA).  Under this
act, the collective bargaining agreements among the Company’s subsidiaries and
these organizations generally do not expire but instead become amendable as of a
stated date.  If either party wishes to modify the terms of any such
agreement, it must notify the other party in the manner agreed to by the
parties.  Under the RLA, after receipt of such notice, the parties
must meet for direct negotiations, and if no agreement is reached, either party
may request the National Mediation Board (NMB) to appoint a federal
mediator.  The RLA prescribes no set timetable for the direct
negotiation and mediation process.  It is not unusual for those
processes to last for many months, and even for several years.  If no
agreement is reached in mediation, the NMB in its discretion may declare at some
time that an impasse exists, and if an impasse is declared, the NMB proffers
binding arbitration to the parties.  Either party may decline to
submit to arbitration.  If arbitration is rejected by either party, a
30-day “cooling off” period commences.  During that period (or after),
a Presidential Emergency Board (PEB) may be established, which examines the
parties’ positions and recommends a solution.  The PEB process lasts
for 30 days and is followed by another “cooling off” period of 30
days.  At the end of a “cooling off” period, unless an agreement is
reached or action is taken by Congress, the labor organization may exercise
“self-help,” such as a strike, and the airline may resort to its own
“self-help,” including the imposition of any or all of its proposed amendments
and the hiring of new employees to replace any striking workers.

 

 






 



In April
2003, American reached agreements (the Labor Agreements) with its three major
unions - the Allied Pilots Association (the APA) which represents American’s
pilots, the Transport Workers Union of America (AFL-CIO) (the TWU), which
represents seven different employee groups, and the Association of Professional
Flight Attendants (the APFA), which represents American’s flight attendants. The
Labor Agreements substantially moderated the labor costs associated with the
employees represented by the unions.  In conjunction with the Labor
Agreements, American also implemented various changes in the pay plans and
benefits for non-unionized personnel, including officers and other management
(the Management Reductions). The Labor Agreements became amendable in 2008
(although the parties agreed that they could begin the negotiations process as
early as 2006).  In 2006, American and the APA commenced negotiations under
the RLA.  In April of 2008, following a request by the APA, a mediator
was appointed by the National Mediation Board.  The parties have been in
mediated negotiations since that time.

Also in
2006, American and the TWU commenced negotiations with respect only to
dispatchers, one of the seven groups at American represented by the TWU. 
Subsequently, following a request by the parties, a mediator was appointed by
the NMB for the dispatcher negotiations.  Thereafter, in November 2007,
American and the TWU commenced negotiations under the RLA with respect to the
other employee groups represented by the TWU.  Direct negotiations between
American and the TWU employees with respect to those other groups continued
until December 2008, at which time the parties jointly filed with the NMB for
mediation with respect to the fleet service, stores, ground school instructors,
and simulator technician groups of employees.  The NMB appointed a mediator
soon thereafter.  Then in January, 2009, the TWU applied to the NMB for the
appointment of a mediator with respect to the mechanics and the technical
specialists.  The NMB will appoint a mediator to assist those negotiations,
as well.

American
and the APFA commenced negotiations in the first half of 2008.  Direct
negotiations between the parties continued until December 2008, at which time
the parties jointly filed an application to the NMB asking that a mediator be
appointed.  The NMB appointed a mediator soon thereafter.

The Air
Line Pilots Association (ALPA), which represents American Eagle pilots, reached
agreement with American Eagle effective September 1, 1997, to have all of the
pilots of the American Eagle® carriers (currently American Eagle Airlines, Inc.
and Executive Airlines, Inc.) covered by a single contract.  This agreement
lasts until January 1, 2013.  The agreement provides to the parties the
right to seek limited changes in 2000, 2004, 2008 and 2012. If the parties are
unable to agree on the limited changes, the agreement provides that any issues
would be resolved by interest arbitration, without the exercise of self-help
(such as a strike).  ALPA and American Eagle negotiated a tentative
agreement in 2000, but that agreement failed in ratification. Thereafter, the
parties participated in interest arbitration. The interest arbitration panel
determined the limited changes that should be made and these changes were
appropriately effected.  In 2004 and in 2008, the parties successfully
negotiated limited changes.  The pilot agreement is amendable January 1,
2013; however, the parties have agreed that contract openers may be exchanged
120 days prior to that date.

The
Association of Flight Attendants (AFA) represents the flight attendants of the
American Eagle carriers. The current agreement between the American Eagle
carriers and the AFA is amendable on October 27, 2009; however, the parties have
agreed that contract openers may be exchanged 90 days prior to that date. 
The other union employees at the American Eagle carriers are covered by separate
agreements with the TWU. The agreements between the American Eagle carriers and
the TWU were amendable beginning on October 1, 2007, and the parties commenced
negotiations.  In January, 2009, an application for mediation was
filed with the NMB.  A mediator from the NMB will be assisting the
parties.



 



 






 



Fuel

The
Company’s operations and financial results are significantly affected by the
availability and price of jet fuel.  The Company's fuel costs and
consumption for the years 2006 through 2008 were:





 
 
 
 
Year

 



 
Gallons
Consumed
(in
      millions)

 
 



 
 
Total
      Cost
(in
      millions)

 
 



Average
      Cost Per Gallon
(in
      dollars)

 
 



Percent
      of AMR's Operating Expenses

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2006

 
 
3,178
 
 
$
6,402
 
 
$
2.014
 
 
 
29.8
%



2007

 
 
3,130
 
 
 
6,670
 
 
 
2.131
 
 
 
30.4
 



2008

 
 
2,971
 
 
 
9,014
 
 
 
3.034
 
 
 
35.1
 





The
impact of fuel price changes on the Company and its competitors depends on
various factors, including hedging strategies.  The Company has a fuel
hedging program in which it enters into jet fuel and heating oil hedging
contracts to dampen the impact of the volatility of jet fuel prices. During
2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company’s fuel hedging program reduced the Company’s
fuel expense by approximately $380 million, $239 million and $97 million,
respectively. As of January 2009, the Company had cash flow hedges, with option
contracts, primarily heating oil collars and call options, covering
approximately 35 percent of its estimated 2009 fuel requirements.  The
consumption hedged for 2009 by cash flow hedges is capped at an average price of
approximately $2.59 per gallon of jet fuel, and the Company’s collars have an
average floor price of approximately $1.94 per gallon of jet fuel (both the
capped and floor price exclude taxes and transportation costs).  As a
result of the rapid decline in energy prices in the second half of 2008 and
certain other events, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months
it will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings
approximately $711 million in net incremental expenses related to its fuel
derivative hedges (based on prices as of December 31, 2008).  A
deterioration of the Company’s financial position could negatively affect the
Company’s ability to hedge fuel in the future. See the Risk Factors under Item
1A for additional information regarding fuel.

Additional
information regarding the Company’s fuel program is also included in Item 7(A)
“Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk,” Item 7
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” and in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.

Frequent Flyer
Program

American
established the AAdvantage® frequent flyer program (AAdvantage) to develop
passenger loyalty by offering awards to travelers for their continued patronage.
The Company believes that the AAdvantage program is one of its competitive
strengths. AAdvantage benefits from a growing base of approximately 62 million
members with desirable demographics who have demonstrated a strong willingness
to collect AAdvantage miles over other loyalty program incentives and are
generally disposed to adjusting their purchasing behavior in order to earn
additional AAdvantage miles.  AAdvantage members earn mileage credits
by flying on American, American Eagle, and the AmericanConnection® carriers or
by using services of other participants in the AAdvantage
program.  Mileage credits can be redeemed for free, discounted or
upgraded travel on American, American Eagle or other participating airlines, or
for other awards.  Once a member accrues sufficient mileage for an
award, the member may book award travel.  Most travel awards are
subject to capacity controlled seating. A member’s mileage credit does not
expire as long as that member has any type of qualifying activity at least once
every 18 months.

American
sells mileage credits and related services to other participants in the
AAdvantage program. There are over 1,000 program participants, including a
leading credit card issuer, hotels, car rental companies and other products and
services companies in the AAdvantage program.  The Company believes
that program participants benefit from the sustained purchasing behavior of
AAdvantage members, which translates into a recurring stream of revenues for
AAdvantage.  Under its agreements with AAdvantage members and program
participants, the Company reserves the right to change the AAdvantage program at
any time without notice, and may end the program with six months
notice.  As of December 31, 2008, AAdvantage had approximately 62
million total members, and 607 billion outstanding award
miles.  During 2008, AAdvantage issued approximately 196 billion
miles, of which approximately one-half were sold to program
participants.  See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” under
Item 7 for more information on AAdvantage.


 



 






 



Other
Matters

Seasonality and Other
Factors   The Company’s results of operations for any
interim period are not necessarily indicative of those for the entire year,
since the air transportation business is subject to seasonal
fluctuations.  Higher demand for air travel has traditionally resulted
in more favorable operating and financial results for the second and third
quarters of the year than for the first and fourth quarters. Fears of terrorism
or war, fare initiatives, fluctuations in fuel prices, labor actions, weather
and other factors could impact this seasonal pattern. Unaudited quarterly
financial data for the two-year period ended December 31, 2008 is included in
Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements.  In addition, the
results of operations in the air transportation business have also significantly
fluctuated in the past in response to general economic conditions.

Insurance   The
Company carries insurance for public liability, passenger liability, property
damage and all-risk coverage for damage to its aircraft.  As a result
of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 (the Terrorist Attacks), aviation
insurers significantly reduced the amount of insurance coverage available to
commercial air carriers for liability to persons other than employees or
passengers for claims resulting from acts of terrorism, war or similar events
(war-risk coverage). At the same time, these insurers significantly increased
the premiums for aviation insurance in general.

The U.S.
government has agreed to provide commercial war-risk insurance for U.S. based
airlines until March 31, 2009, covering losses to employees, passengers, third
parties and aircraft.  Beyond that date, the Secretary of
Transportation has the authority to provide commercial war-risk insurance until
May 31, 2009.  If the U.S. government does not extend the policy
beyond March 31, 2009 (or beyond May 31, 2009 if the Secretary has exercised the
authority to extend coverage to that date), or if the U.S. government at anytime
thereafter ceases to provide such insurance, or reduces the coverage provided by
such insurance, the Company will attempt to purchase similar coverage with
narrower scope from commercial insurers at an additional cost. To the extent
this coverage is not available at commercially reasonable rates, the Company
would be adversely affected. While the price of commercial insurance has
declined since the premium increases immediately after the Terrorist Attacks, in
the event commercial insurance carriers further reduce the amount of insurance
coverage available to the Company, or significantly increase its cost, the
Company would be adversely affected.

Other Government
Matters   In time of war or during a national emergency or
defense oriented situation, American and other air carriers can be required to
provide airlift services to the Air Mobility Command under the Civil Reserve Air
Fleet program. In the event the Company has to provide a substantial number of
aircraft and crew to the Air Mobility Command, its operations could be adversely
impacted.

Available
Information   The Company makes its annual report on Form
10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and
amendments to reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 available free of charge under the Investor
Relations page on its website, www.aa.com, as soon
as reasonably practicable after such reports are electronically filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. In addition, the Company’s code of ethics
(called the Standards of Business Conduct), which applies to all employees of
the Company, including the Company’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief
Financial Officer (CFO) and Controller, is posted under the Investor Relations
page on its website, www.aa.com. The
Company intends to disclose any amendments to the code of ethics, or waivers of
the code of ethics on behalf of the CEO, CFO or Controller, under the Investor
Relations page on the Company’s website, www.aa.com.  The
charters for the AMR Board of Directors’ standing committees (the Audit,
Compensation, Diversity and Nominating/Corporate Governance Committees), as well
as the Board of Directors’ Governance Policies (the Governance Policies), are
likewise available on the Company’s website, www.aa.com.  Upon
request, copies of the charters or the Governance Policies are available at no
cost.  Information on the Company’s website is not incorporated into
or otherwise made a part of this Report.


 



 






 



ITEM
1A.     RISK FACTORS

Our
ability to become profitable and our ability to continue to fund our obligations
on an ongoing basis will depend on a number of risk factors, many of which are
largely beyond our control.  Some of the factors that may have a
negative impact on us are described below:

As a result of significant losses in
recent years, our financial condition has been materially
weakened.
     
We
incurred significant losses in 2001-2005, which materially weakened our
financial condition. We lost $857 million in 2005, $751 million in
2004, $1.2 billion in 2003, $3.5 billion in 2002 and $1.8 billion
in 2001. Although we earned a profit of $504 million in 2007 and $231
million in 2006, we lost $2.1 billion in 2008 (which included a
$1.1 billion impairment charge). Because of our weakened financial
condition, we are vulnerable both to the impact of unexpected events (such as
terrorist attacks or spikes in jet fuel prices) and to deterioration of the
operating environment (such as a deepening of the current global recession or
significant increased competition).

The severe global economic downturn has resulted in
weaker demand for air travel and lower
investment asset returns, which may have a significant negative impact on
us.

We are experiencing significantly weaker demand for air
travel driven by the severe downturn in the global economy.  Many of
the countries we serve are experiencing economic slowdowns or
recessions.  We began to experience weakening demand late in 2008, and
this weakness has continued into 2009.  We reduced capacity in 2008,
and we recently announced further reductions to our 2009 capacity
plan.  If the global economic downturn persists or worsens, demand for
air travel may continue to weaken.  No assurance can be given that
capacity reductions or other steps we may take will be adequate to offset the
effects of reduced demand.

The
economic downturn has resulted in broadly lower investment asset returns and
values, and our pension assets suffered a material decrease in value in 2008
related to broader stock market declines, which will result in higher pension
expense and potentially higher required contributions in future
years.  In addition, under these unfavorable economic conditions, we
may also be required to maintain substantial cash reserves under our credit card
processing agreements.  These issues individually or collectively may
have a material adverse impact on our liquidity. Also, disruptions in the
capital markets and other sources of funding may make it impossible for us to
obtain necessary additional funding or make the cost of that funding
prohibitive.

We face numerous challenges as we
seek to maintain sufficient liquidity, and we will need to raise substantial
additional funds.  We may not be able to raise those funds, or to do
so on acceptable terms.
     
We have
significant debt, lease and other obligations in the next several years,
including significant pension funding obligations.  For example, in
2009 we will be required to make approximately $1.8 billion of principal
payments on long-term debt and approximately $110 million in principal payments
on capital leases, and we expect to make approximately $1.6 billion of capital
expenditures.  In addition, the global economic downturn, potential
increases in the amount of required reserves under credit card processing
agreements, and the obligation to post cash collateral on fuel hedging contracts
have negatively impacted, or may in the future negatively impact, our
liquidity.  To meet our commitments and to maintain sufficient
liquidity as we continue to implement our restructuring and cost reduction
initiatives, we will need continued access to substantial additional funding.
While we have arranged financing that, subject to certain terms and conditions,
covers a majority of our 2009 aircraft deliveries and have arranged backstop
financing which could be used for a significant portion of our remaining 2009 -
2011 Boeing 737-800 aircraft deliveries, we will also need to raise additional
funds to meet our commitments to purchase aircraft and execute our fleet
replacement plan.

Our
ability to obtain future financing is limited by the value of our unencumbered
assets. A very large majority of our aircraft assets (including most of our
aircraft eligible for the benefits of Section 1110 of the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code) are encumbered. Also, the market value of our aircraft assets has declined
in recent years, and may continue to decline.

Since the
Terrorist Attacks of September 2001, our credit ratings have been lowered
to significantly below investment grade. These reductions have increased our
borrowing costs and otherwise adversely affected borrowing terms, and limited
borrowing options. Additional reductions in our credit ratings might have other
effects on us, such as further increasing borrowing or other costs or further
restricting our ability to raise funds.
     


 



 






 



A number
of other factors, including our financial results in recent years, our
substantial indebtedness, the difficult revenue environment we face, our reduced
credit ratings, recent historically high fuel prices, and the financial
difficulties experienced in the airline industry, adversely affect the
availability and terms of funding for us. In
addition, the global economic downturn and recent severe disruptions in the
capital markets and other sources of funding have resulted in greater
volatility, less liquidity, widening of credit spreads, and substantially more
limited availability of funding.  As a result of these factors, there
can be no assurance that additional funding will be available to us on
acceptable terms, if at all. An inability to obtain necessary additional funding
on acceptable terms would have a material adverse impact on us and on our
ability to sustain our operations.

Our initiatives to generate
additional revenues and to reduce our costs may not be adequate or
successful.
    
As we
seek to improve our financial condition, we must continue to take steps to
generate additional revenues and to reduce our costs. Although we have a number
of initiatives underway to address our cost and revenue challenges, some of
these initiatives involve changes to our business which we may be unable to
implement. In addition, we expect that, as time goes on, it will be
progressively more difficult to identify and implement significant revenue
enhancement and cost savings initiatives. The adequacy and ultimate success of
our initiatives to generate additional revenues and reduce our costs are not
known at this time and cannot be assured. Moreover, whether our initiatives will
be adequate or successful depends in large measure on factors beyond our
control, notably the overall industry environment, including passenger demand,
yield and industry capacity growth, and fuel prices.  It will be very difficult for us to continue to fund our
obligations on an ongoing basis, and to return to profitability, if the overall
industry revenue environment does not improve substantially and if fuel prices
were to increase and persist for an extended period at high
levels.

We may be adversely affected by
increases in fuel prices, and we would be adversely affected by disruptions in
the supply of fuel.

Our
results are very significantly affected by the volatile price and the
availability of jet fuel, which are in turn affected by a number of factors
beyond our control.  Fuel prices have only recently declined from
historic high levels.
     
Due to
the competitive nature of the airline industry, we may not be able to pass on
increased fuel prices to customers by increasing fares. Although we had some
success in raising fares and imposing fuel surcharges in reaction to recent high
fuel prices, these fare increases and surcharges did not keep pace with the
extraordinary increases in the price of fuel that occurred in 2007 and 2008.
Furthermore, even though fuel prices have declined significantly from their
recent historic high levels, reduced demand or increased fare competition, or
both,  and resulting lower revenues may offset any potential benefit
of these lower fuel prices.
     
While we
do not currently anticipate a significant reduction in fuel availability,
dependence on foreign imports of crude oil, limited refining capacity and the
possibility of changes in government policy on jet fuel production,
transportation and marketing make it impossible to predict the future
availability of jet fuel. If there are additional outbreaks of hostilities or
other conflicts in oil producing areas or elsewhere, or a reduction in refining
capacity (due to weather events, for example), or governmental limits on the
production or sale of jet fuel, there could be a reduction in the supply of jet
fuel and significant increases in the cost of jet fuel. Major reductions in the
availability of jet fuel or significant increases in its cost would have a
material adverse impact on us.

We have a
large number of older aircraft in our fleet, and these aircraft are not as fuel
efficient as more recent models of aircraft. We believe it is imperative that we
continue to execute our fleet renewal plans.  However, due to the
recent machinist strike at Boeing, deliveries of the Boeing 737-800 aircraft we
currently have on order have been delayed.  In addition, we expect
delays in the deliveries of the Boeing 787-9 aircraft we currently have on
order.

While we
seek to manage the risk of fuel price increases by using derivative contracts,
there can be no assurance that, at any given time, we will have derivatives in
place to provide any particular level of protection against increased fuel
costs. In addition, a deterioration of our financial position could negatively
affect our ability to enter into derivative contracts in the
future.  Moreover, declines in fuel prices below the levels
established in derivative contracts may require us to post cash collateral to
secure the loss positions on such contracts, and if such contracts close when
fuel prices are below the applicable levels, we would be required to make
payments to close such contracts; these payments would be treated as additional
fuel expense.
 












Our indebtedness and other
obligations are substantial and could adversely affect our business and
liquidity.

     
We have
and will continue to have significant amounts of indebtedness, obligations to
make future payments on aircraft equipment and property leases, and obligations
under aircraft purchase agreements, as well as a high proportion of debt to
equity capital.  In 2009, we will be required to make approximately
$1.8 billion of principal payments on long-term debt. We expect to
incur substantial additional debt (including secured debt) and lease obligations
in the future. We also have substantial pension funding obligations. Our
substantial indebtedness and other obligations have important consequences. For
example, they:




 
      

•

 
      

limit
      our ability to obtain additional funding for working capital, capital
      expenditures, acquisitions and general corporate purposes, and adversely
      affect the terms on which such funding can be obtained;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

require
      us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to
      payments on our indebtedness and other obligations, thereby reducing the
      funds available for other purposes;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

make
      us more vulnerable to economic downturns; and



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

limit
      our ability to withstand competitive pressures and reduce our flexibility
      in responding to changing business and economic
  conditions.





We may be unable to comply with our
financial covenants.

As of
December 31, 2008 American had a secured bank credit facility (the Credit
Facility) consisting of a fully drawn $255 million revolving credit
facility with a final maturity on June 17, 2009, and a fully drawn
$436 million term loan facility with a final maturity on December 17,
2010. The Credit Facility contains a liquidity covenant and a covenant that
requires AMR to maintain certain minimum ratios of cash flow to fixed charges
(the EBITDAR covenant). We were in compliance with the liquidity covenant as of
December 31, 2008. In May 2008, we entered into an amendment to the Credit
Facility which waived compliance with the EBITDAR covenant for periods ending on
any date from and including June 30, 2008 and through March 31, 2009,
and which reduced the minimum ratios AMR is required to satisfy thereafter.
Given fuel prices that have been very high by historical standards and the
volatility of fuel prices and revenues, uncertainty in the capital markets and
about other sources of funding, and other
factors, it is difficult to assess whether we will be able to continue to comply
with these covenants, and there are no assurances that we will be able to do so.
Failure to comply with these covenants would result in a default under the
Credit Facility which — if we did not take steps to obtain a waiver of, or
otherwise mitigate, the default — could result in a default under a significant
amount of our other debt and lease obligations, and otherwise have a material
adverse impact on us.

Our business is affected by many
changing economic and other conditions beyond our control, and our results of
operations tend to be volatile and fluctuate due to
seasonality.
     
Our
business and our results of operations are affected by many changing economic
and other conditions beyond our control, including, among others:




 
      

•

 
      

actual
      or potential changes in international, national, regional and local
      economic, business and financial conditions, including recession,
      inflation, higher interest rates, wars, terrorist attacks or political
      instability;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

changes
      in consumer preferences, perceptions, spending patterns or demographic
      trends;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

changes
      in the competitive environment due to industry consolidation and other
      factors;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

actual
      or potential disruptions to the air traffic control systems;
 



 
      

•

 
      

increases
      in costs of safety, security and environmental
measures;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

outbreaks
      of diseases that affect travel behavior; and



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

weather
      and natural disasters.




     
As a
result, our results of operations tend to be volatile and subject to rapid and
unexpected change. In addition, due to generally greater demand for air travel
during the summer, our revenues in the second and third quarters of the year
tend to be stronger than revenues in the first and fourth quarters of the
year.







The airline industry is fiercely
competitive and may undergo further consolidation or changes in industry
alliances, and we are subject to increasing competition.
     
Service
over almost all of our routes is highly competitive and fares remain at low
levels by historical standards. We face vigorous, and, in some cases,
increasing, competition from major domestic airlines, national, regional,
all-cargo and charter carriers, foreign air carriers, low-cost carriers and,
particularly on shorter segments, ground and rail transportation. We also face
increasing and significant competition from marketing/operational alliances
formed by our competitors. The percentage of routes on which we compete with
carriers having substantially lower operating costs than ours has grown
significantly over the past decade, and we now compete with low-cost carriers on
a large majority of our domestic non-stop mainline network routes.
     
Certain
airline alliances have been granted immunity from antitrust regulations by
governmental authorities for specific areas of cooperation, such as joint
pricing decisions. To the extent alliances formed by our competitors can
undertake activities that are not available to us, our ability to effectively
compete may be hindered.
     
Pricing
decisions are significantly affected by competition from other airlines. Fare
discounting by competitors historically has had a negative effect on our
financial results because we must generally match competitors’ fares, since
failing to match would result in even less revenue. We have faced increased
competition from carriers with simplified fare structures, which are generally
preferred by travelers. Any fare reduction or fare simplification initiative may
not be offset by increases in passenger traffic, reduction in cost or changes in
the mix of traffic that would improve yields. Moreover, decisions by our
competitors that increase or reduce overall industry capacity, or capacity
dedicated to a particular domestic or foreign region, market or route, can have
a material impact on related fare levels.
     
There
have been numerous mergers and acquisitions within the airline industry and
numerous changes in industry alliances. Recently, two of our largest
competitors, Delta and Northwest Airlines, merged, and the combined entity
became the largest scheduled passenger airline in the world in terms of
available seat miles and revenue passenger miles.  In addition,
another two of our largest competitors, United and Continental, recently
announced that they had entered into a framework agreement to cooperate
extensively and under which Continental would join the global alliance of which
United, Lufthansa and certain other airlines are members.
     
In the
future, there may be additional mergers and acquisitions, and changes in airline
alliances, including those that may be undertaken in response to the merger of
Delta and Northwest or other developments in the airline industry. Any airline
industry consolidation or changes in airline alliances could substantially alter
the competitive landscape and result in changes in our corporate or business
strategy. We regularly assess and explore the potential for consolidation in our
industry and changes in airline alliances, our strategic position and ways to
enhance our competitiveness, including the possibilities for our participation
in merger activity. Consolidation involving other participants in our industry
could result in the formation of one or more airlines with greater financial
resources, more extensive networks, and/or lower cost structures than exist
currently, which could have a material adverse effect on us. For similar
reasons, changes in airline alliances could also adversely affect our
competitive position.
     
We
recently announced that we have entered into a joint business agreement and
related marketing arrangements with British Airways and Iberia, which provide
for commercial cooperation on flights between North America and most countries
in Europe, pooling and sharing of certain revenues and costs, expanded
codesharing, enhanced frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in
other areas. Along with these carriers and certain other carriers, we have
applied to the U.S. Department of Transportation for antitrust immunity for this
planned cooperation. Implementation of this agreement and the related
arrangements is subject to conditions, including various U.S. and foreign
regulatory approvals, successful negotiation of certain detailed financial and
commercial arrangements, and other approvals. Agencies from which such approvals
must be obtained may impose requirements or limitations as a condition of
granting any such approvals, such as requiring divestiture of routes, gates,
slots or other assets. No assurances can be given as to any arrangements that
may ultimately be implemented or any benefits that we may derive from such
arrangements.

We compete with reorganized carriers,
which results in competitive disadvantages for us.
     
We must
compete with air carriers that have reorganized under the protection of
Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in recent years, including United,
Delta, Northwest and U.S. Airways. It is possible that other significant
competitors may seek to reorganize in or out of Chapter 11.
     


 



 






 



Successful
reorganizations by other carriers present us with competitors with significantly
lower operating costs and stronger financial positions derived from renegotiated
labor, supply, and financing contracts. These competitive pressures may limit
our ability to adequately price our services, may require us to further reduce
our operating costs, and could have a material adverse impact on
us.

Fares are at low levels and our
reduced pricing power adversely affects our ability to achieve adequate pricing,
especially with respect to business travel.
     
While we
have recently been able to implement some fare increases on certain domestic and
international routes, our passenger yield is essentially the same as it was in
2000 despite cumulative inflation of approximately 25 percent since that
time.  We believe that this is due in large part to a corresponding
decline in our pricing power. Our reduced pricing power is the product of
several factors including: greater cost sensitivity on the part of travelers
(particularly business travelers); pricing transparency resulting from the use
of the Internet; greater competition from low-cost carriers and from carriers
that have recently reorganized under the protection of Chapter 11; other
carriers being well hedged against rising fuel costs and able to better absorb
high jet fuel prices; and fare simplification efforts by certain carriers. We
believe that our reduced pricing power could persist indefinitely.

Our corporate or business strategy
may change.
     
In light
of the rapid changes in the airline industry, we evaluate our assets on an
ongoing basis with a view to maximizing their value to us and determining which
are core to our operations. We also regularly evaluate our corporate and
business strategies, and they are influenced by factors beyond our control,
including changes in the competitive landscape we face. Our corporate and
business strategies are, therefore, subject to change.
 
Beginning
in late 2007 and continuing into 2008, we conducted a strategic value review
involving, among other things, AMR Eagle, our regional airline, American Beacon
Advisors, our investment advisory subsidiary and AAdvantage, our frequent flyer
program. The purpose of the review was to determine whether there existed the
potential for unlocking additional stockholder value with respect to one or more
of these strategic assets through some type of separation transaction. As a
result of this review, we announced in late 2007 that we planned to divest AMR
Eagle; however, in mid-2008 we announced that, given the then-current industry
environment, we had decided to place that planned divestiture on hold until
industry conditions are more favorable and stable. Also pursuant to the review,
we sold American Beacon Advisors to a third party in September 2008 (the Company
maintained a minority equity stake).

In the
future, we may consider and engage in discussions with third parties regarding
the divestiture of AMR Eagle and other separation transactions, and we may
decide to proceed with one or more such transactions. There can be no assurance
that we will complete any separation transactions, that any announced plans or
transactions will be consummated, or as to the impact of these transactions on
stockholder value or on us.

Our business is subject to extensive
government regulation, which can result in increases in our costs, disruptions
to our operations, limits on our operating flexibility, reductions in the demand
for air travel, and competitive disadvantages.
     
Airlines
are subject to extensive domestic and international regulatory requirements.
Many of these requirements result in significant costs. For example, the FAA
from time to time issues directives and other regulations relating to the
maintenance and operation of aircraft. Compliance with those requirements drives
significant expenditures and has in the past, and may in the future, cause
disruptions to our operations. In addition, the ability of U.S. carriers to
operate international routes is subject to change because the applicable
arrangements between the United States and foreign governments may be amended
from time to time, or because appropriate slots or facilities are not made
available.
     
Moreover,
additional laws, regulations, taxes and airport rates and charges have been
enacted from time to time that have significantly increased the costs of airline
operations, reduced the demand for air travel or restricted the way we can
conduct our business. For example, the Aviation and Transportation Security Act,
which became law in 2001, mandated the federalization of certain airport
security procedures and resulted in the imposition of additional security
requirements on airlines. In addition, many aspects of our operations are
subject to increasingly stringent environmental regulations, and concerns about
climate change, in particular, may result in the imposition of additional
regulation.  For example, the EU has approved a proposal that will put
a cap on carbon dioxide emissions for all flights into and out of the EU
effective in 2012. Laws or regulations similar to those described above or other
U.S. or foreign governmental actions in the future may adversely affect our
business and financial results.







The
results of our operations, demand for air travel, and the manner in which we
conduct our business each may be affected by changes in law and future actions
taken by governmental agencies, including:




 
      

•

 
      

changes
      in law which affect the services that can be offered by airlines in
      particular markets and at particular airports;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

the
      granting and timing of certain governmental approvals (including foreign
      government approvals) needed for codesharing alliances and other
      arrangements with other airlines;



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

restrictions
      on competitive practices (for example court orders, or agency regulations
      or orders, that would curtail an airline’s ability to respond to a
      competitor);



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

the
      adoption of regulations that impact customer service standards (for
      example new passenger security standards, passenger bill of
      rights);



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

restrictions
      on airport operations, such as restrictions on the use of takeoff and
      landing slots at airports or the auction of slot rights currently or
      previously held by us; or



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      

•

 
      

the
      adoption of more restrictive locally imposed noise
      restrictions.





In
addition, the air traffic control (ATC) system, which is operated by the
FAA, is not successfully managing the growing demand for U.S. air
travel.  U.S. airlines carry about 740 million passengers a year and
are forecasted to accommodate a billion passengers annually by
2015.  Air-traffic controllers rely on outdated technologies that
routinely overwhelm the system and compel airlines to fly inefficient, indirect
routes.  We support a common-sense approach to ATC modernization that
would allocate cost to all ATC system users in proportion to the services they
consume. The reauthorization by the U.S. Congress of legislation that funds the
FAA, which includes proposals regarding upgrades to the ATC system, is pending,
but it is uncertain when any such legislation will be enacted.

We could be adversely affected by
conflicts overseas or terrorist attacks.
     
Actual or
threatened U.S. military involvement in overseas operations has, on occasion,
had an adverse impact on our business, financial position (including access to
capital markets) and results of operations, and on the airline industry in
general. The continuing conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan, or other conflicts or
events in the Middle East or elsewhere, may result in similar adverse
impacts.
     
The
Terrorist Attacks had a material adverse impact on us. The occurrence of another
terrorist attack (whether domestic or international and whether against us or
another entity) could again have a material adverse impact on us.

Our international operations could be
adversely affected by numerous events, circumstances or government actions
beyond our control.
     
Our
current international activities and prospects could be adversely affected by
factors such as reversals or delays in the opening of foreign markets, exchange
controls, currency and political risks, environmental regulation, taxation and
changes in international government regulation of our operations, including the
inability to obtain or retain needed route authorities and/or
slots.
     
For
example, the “open skies” air services agreement between the United States and
the EU which took effect in March 2008, provides airlines from the United
States and EU member states open access to each other’s markets, with freedom of
pricing and unlimited rights to fly beyond the United States and any airport in
the EU including London’s Heathrow Airport. The agreement has resulted in
American facing increased competition in these markets, including Heathrow,
where we have lost market share.

We could be adversely affected by an
outbreak of a disease that affects travel behavior.
     
In 2003,
there was an outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), which had an
adverse impact primarily on our Asia operations. More recently, there have been
concerns about a potential outbreak of avian flu. If there were another outbreak
of a disease (such as SARS or avian flu) that affects travel behavior, it could
have a material adverse impact on us.

 

 






 



Our labor costs are higher than those
of our competitors.
     
Wages,
salaries and benefits constitute a significant percentage of our total operating
expenses. In 2008, they constituted approximately 26 percent of our total
operating expenses. All of the major hub-and-spoke carriers with whom American
competes have achieved significant labor cost savings through or outside of
bankruptcy proceedings. We believe American’s labor costs are higher than those
of its primary competitors, and it is unclear how long this labor cost
disadvantage may persist.

We could be adversely affected if we
are unable to have satisfactory relations with any unionized or other employee
work group.
     
Our
operations could be adversely affected if we fail to have satisfactory relations
with any labor union representing our employees. In addition, any significant
dispute we have with, or any disruption by, an employee work group could
adversely impact us. Moreover, one of the fundamental tenets of our strategic
Turnaround Plan is increased union and employee involvement in our operations.
To the extent that we are unable to have satisfactory relations with any
unionized or other employee work group, our ability to execute our strategic
plans could be adversely affected.

American
is currently in mediated negotiations with each of its three major unions
regarding amendments to their respective labor agreements.  American
Eagle is also in mediated negotiations with the TWU.  The negotiations
process in the airline industry typically is slow and sometimes
contentious.  The union that represents American’s pilots has recently
filed a number of grievances, lawsuits and complaints, most of which American
believes are part of a corporate campaign related to the union’s labor agreement
negotiations with American.  While American is vigorously defending
these claims, unfavorable outcomes of one or more of them could require American
to incur additional costs, change the way it conducts some parts of its
business, or otherwise adversely affect us.

Our insurance costs have increased
substantially and further increases in insurance costs or reductions in coverage
could have an adverse impact on us.
     
We carry
insurance for public liability, passenger liability, property damage and
all-risk coverage for damage to our aircraft. As a result of the Terrorist
Attacks, aviation insurers significantly reduced the amount of insurance
coverage available to commercial air carriers for liability to persons other
than employees or passengers for claims resulting from acts of terrorism, war or
similar events (war-risk coverage). At the same time, these insurers
significantly increased the premiums for aviation insurance in
general.
     
The U.S.
government has agreed to provide commercial war-risk insurance for U.S. based
airlines through March 31, 2009, covering losses to employees, passengers,
third parties and aircraft. Beyond that date, the Secretary of Transportation
has the authority to provide commercial war-risk insurance until May 31,
2009.  If the U.S. government does not extend the policy beyond March
31, 2009 (or beyond May 31, 2009 if the Secretary has exercised the authority to
extend coverage to that date), or if the U.S. government at any time thereafter
ceases to provide such insurance, or reduces the coverage provided by such
insurance, we will attempt to purchase similar coverage with narrower scope from
commercial insurers at an additional cost. To the extent this coverage is not
available at commercially reasonable rates, we would be adversely
affected.
     
While the
price of commercial insurance had declined since the period immediately after
the Terrorist Attacks, in the event commercial insurance carriers further reduce
the amount of insurance coverage available to us, or significantly increase its
cost, we would be adversely affected.

We may be unable to retain key
management personnel.
     
Since the
Terrorist Attacks, a number of our key management employees have elected to
retire early or leave for more financially favorable opportunities at other
companies, both within and outside of the airline industry. There can be no
assurance that we will be able to retain our key management employees. Any
inability to retain our key management employees, or attract and retain
additional qualified management employees, could have a negative impact on
us.



 



 






 



We could be adversely affected by a
failure or disruption of our computer, communications or other technology
systems.
    
We are
heavily and increasingly dependent on technology to operate our business. The
computer and communications systems on which we rely could be disrupted due to
various events, some of which are beyond our control, including natural
disasters, power failures, terrorist attacks, equipment failures, software
failures and computer viruses and hackers. We have taken certain steps to help
reduce the risk of some (but not all) of these potential disruptions. There can
be no assurance, however, that the measures we have taken are adequate to
prevent or remedy disruptions or failures of these systems. Any substantial or
repeated failure of these systems could impact our operations and customer
service, result in the loss of important data, loss of revenues, and increased
costs, and generally harm our business.  Moreover, a failure of
certain of our vital systems could limit our ability to operate our flights for
an extended period of time, which would have a material adverse impact on our
operations and our business.

We
are at risk of losses and adverse publicity which might result from an accident
involving any of our aircraft.

If one of
our aircraft were to be involved in an accident, we could be exposed to
significant tort liability.  The insurance we carry to cover damages
arising from any future accidents may be inadequate.  In the event
that our insurance is not adequate, we may be forced to bear substantial losses
from an accident.  In addition, any accident involving an aircraft
operated by us could adversely affect the public’s perception of
us.


 



 






 



ITEM
1B.     UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS

The
Company had no unresolved Securities and Exchange Commission staff comments at
December 31, 2008.


ITEM
2.                 PROPERTIES

Flight
Equipment  –  Operating

Owned and
leased aircraft operated by the Company at December 31, 2008
included:






 
 
Equipment
      Type

 



Average
      Seating Capacity

 
 



 
Owned

 
 



Capital
      Leased

 
 



Operating
      Leased

 
 



 
Total

 
 

Average
Age
      (Years)

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airbus
      A300-600R

 
 
267
 
 
 
10
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
16
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
19
 



Boeing
      737-800

 
 
148
 
 
 
62
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
77
 
 
 
9
 



Boeing
      757-200

 
 
188
 
 
 
92
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
31
 
 
 
124
 
 
 
14
 



Boeing
      767-200 Extended Range

 
 
167
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
11
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
22
 



Boeing
      767-300 Extended Range

 
 
225
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
11
 
 
 
58
 
 
 
15
 



Boeing
      777-200 Extended Range

 
 
247
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
47
 
 
 
8
 



McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80

 
 
140
 
 
 
108
 
 
 
64
 
 
 
107
 
 
 
279
 
 
 
19
 



Total

 
 
 
 
 
 
369
 
 
 
76
 
 
 
181
 
 
 
626
 
 
 
15
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



AMR
      Eagle Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Bombardier
      CRJ-700

 
 
70
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
6
 



Embraer
      135

 
 
37
 
 
 
33
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
33
 
 
 
9
 



Embraer
      140

 
 
44
 
 
 
59
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
59
 
 
 
6
 



Embraer
      145

 
 
50
 
 
 
110
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
110
 
 
 
6
 



Super
      ATR

 
 
64/66
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
14
 



Total

 
 
 
 
 
 
227
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
39
 
 
 
266
 
 
 
8
 





A very
large majority of the Company’s owned aircraft are encumbered by liens granted
in connection with financing transactions entered into by the
Company.

Of the
operating aircraft listed above, one owned Airbus A300-600R aircraft was in
temporary storage as of December 31, 2008.

In
January 2009, the Company permanently retired seven McDonnell Douglas MD-80
aircraft and one Airbus A300 aircraft.



 



 






 



Flight
Equipment  –  Non-Operating

Owned and
leased aircraft not operated by the Company at December 31, 2008
included:






 
Equipment
      Type

 



Owned

 
 

Capital
      Leased

 
 

Operating
      Leased

 
 



Total

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airbus
      A300-600R

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
5
 



Fokker
      100

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
4
 
 
 
4
 



McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80

 
 
18
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
38
 



Total

 
 
18
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
47
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



AMR
      Eagle Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Embraer
      135

 
 
6
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
6
 



Embraer
      145

 
 
8
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
8
 



Saab
      340B

 
 
46
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
46
 



Total

 
 
60
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
60
 





AMR Eagle
has leased its eight owned Embraer 145 aircraft not operated by the Company to
Trans States Airlines, Inc.

For
information concerning the estimated useful lives and residual values for owned
aircraft, lease terms for leased aircraft and amortization relating to aircraft
under capital leases, see Notes 1 and 5 to the consolidated financial
statements.

Flight
Equipment  –  Leased

Lease
expirations for the aircraft included in the table of capital and operating
leased flight equipment operated by the Company as of December 31, 2008
are:






 
 
Equipment
      Type

 



 
2009

 
 



 
2010

 
 



 
2011

 
 



 
2012

 
 



 
2013

 
 

2014
and
      Thereafter

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airbus
      A300-600R

 
 
2
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
8
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Boeing
      737-800

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
8
 
 
 
7
 



Boeing
      757-200

 
 
1
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
30
 



Boeing
      767-200 Extended Range

 
 
1
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
-
 



Boeing
      767-300 Extended Range

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
8
 



McDonnell
      Douglas MD-80

 
 
-
 
 
 
8
 
 
 
21
 
 
 
23
 
 
 
27
 
 
 
92
 


 
      
 
 
4
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
44
 
 
 
137
 



AMR
      Eagle Aircraft

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Super
      ATR

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
12
 
 
 
26
 


 
      
 
 
4
 
 
 
15
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
56
 
 
 
163
 





American
leases all 39 Super ATR aircraft from a third party and in turn, subleases those
aircraft to AMR Eagle for operation.

Substantially
all of the Company’s aircraft leases include an option to purchase the aircraft
or to extend the lease term, or both, with the purchase price or renewal rental
to be based essentially on the market value of the aircraft at the end of the
term of the lease or at a predetermined fixed amount.
 
















 

Ground
Properties

The
Company leases or has built as leasehold improvements on leased property: most
of its airport and terminal facilities; its training facilities in Fort Worth,
Texas; its principal overhaul and maintenance bases at Tulsa International
Airport (Tulsa, Oklahoma), Kansas City International Airport (Kansas City,
Missouri) and Alliance Airport (Fort Worth, Texas); its regional reservation
offices; and local ticket and administration offices throughout the
system.  The Company owns its headquarters building in Fort Worth,
Texas, on which a mortgage loan is payable.  American has entered into
agreements with the Tulsa Municipal Airport Trust; the Alliance Airport
Authority, Fort Worth, Texas; the New York City Industrial Development Agency;
and the Dallas/Fort Worth, Chicago O'Hare, Newark, San Juan, and Los Angeles
airport authorities to provide funds for constructing, improving and modifying
facilities and acquiring equipment which are or will be leased to the
Company.  The Company also uses public airports for its flight
operations under lease or use arrangements with the municipalities or
governmental agencies owning or controlling them and leases certain other ground
equipment for use at its facilities.

For
information concerning the estimated lives and residual values for owned ground
properties, lease terms and amortization relating to ground properties under
capital leases, and acquisitions of ground properties, see Notes 1 and 5 to the
consolidated financial statements.


 



 






 



ITEM
3.                 LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS

Between
April 3, 2003 and June 5, 2003, three lawsuits were filed by travel agents, some
of whom opted out of a prior class action (now dismissed) to pursue their claims
individually against American, other airline defendants, and in one case,
against certain airline defendants and Orbitz LLC.  The cases, Tam Travel et. al., v. Delta
Air Lines et. al., in the United States District Court for the Northern
District of California, San Francisco (51 individual agencies), Paula Fausky d/b/a Timeless
Travel v. American Airlines, et. al, in the United States District Court
for the Northern District of Ohio, Eastern Division (29 agencies) and Swope Travel et al. v.
Orbitz et. al. in the United States District Court for the Eastern
District of Texas, Beaumont Division (71 agencies) were consolidated for
pre-trial purposes in the United States District Court for the Northern District
of Ohio, Eastern Division.  Collectively, these lawsuits seek damages and
injunctive relief alleging that the certain airline defendants and Orbitz LLC:
(i) conspired to prevent travel agents from acting as effective competitors in
the distribution of airline tickets to passengers in violation of Section 1 of
the Sherman Act;  (ii) conspired to monopolize the distribution of common
carrier air travel between airports in the United States in violation of Section
2 of the Sherman Act; and that (iii) between 1995 and the present, the airline
defendants conspired to reduce commissions paid to U.S.-based travel agents in
violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act.  On September 23, 2005, the
Fausky
plaintiffs dismissed their claims with prejudice.  On September 14, 2006,
the court dismissed with prejudice 28 of the Swope
plaintiffs.  On October 29, 2007, the court dismissed all
actions.  The Tam plaintiffs have
appealed the court’s decision.  The Swope plaintiffs have
moved to have their case remanded to the Eastern District of Texas.
 American continues to vigorously defend these lawsuits.  A final
adverse court decision awarding substantial money damages or placing material
restrictions on the Company’s distribution practices would have a material
adverse impact on the Company.

On July
12, 2004, a consolidated class action complaint that was subsequently amended on
November 30, 2004, was filed against American and the Association of
Professional Flight Attendants (APFA), the union which represents American’s
flight attendants (Ann
M. Marcoux, et al., v. American Airlines Inc., et al. in the United
States District Court for the Eastern District of New York). While a class has
not yet been certified, the lawsuit seeks on behalf of all of American’s flight
attendants or various subclasses to set aside and to obtain damages allegedly
resulting from the April 2003 Collective Bargaining Agreement referred to as the
Restructuring Participation Agreement (RPA). The RPA was one of three labor
agreements American successfully reached with its unions in order to avoid
filing for bankruptcy in 2003.  In a related case (Sherry Cooper, et al. v.
TWA Airlines, LLC, et al., also in the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of New York), the court denied a preliminary injunction
against implementation of the RPA on June 30, 2003. The Marcoux suit alleges
various claims against the APFA and American relating to the RPA and the
ratification vote on the RPA by individual APFA members, including: violation of
the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act (LMRDA) and the APFA’s
Constitution and By-laws, violation by the APFA of its duty of fair
representation to its members, violation by American of provisions of the
Railway Labor Act (RLA) through improper coercion of flight attendants into
voting or changing their vote for ratification, and violations of the Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act of 1970 (RICO). On
March 28, 2006, the district court dismissed all of various state law claims
against American, all but one of the LMRDA claims against the APFA, and the
claimed violations of RICO.  On July 22, 2008, the district court
granted summary judgment to American and APFA concerning the remaining claimed
violations of the RLA and the duty of fair representation against American and
the APFA (as well as one LMRDA claim and one claim against the APFA of a breach
of its constitution).  On August 20, 2008, a notice of appeal was
filed on behalf of the purported class of flight attendants. Although the
Company believes the case against it is without merit and both American and the
APFA are vigorously defending the lawsuit, a final adverse court decision
invalidating the RPA and awarding substantial money damages would have a
material adverse impact on the Company.



 



 






 



On
February 14, 2006, the Antitrust Division of the United States Department of
Justice (the “DOJ”) served the Company with a grand jury subpoena as part of an
ongoing investigation into possible criminal violations of the antitrust laws by
certain domestic and foreign air cargo carriers. At this time, the Company does
not believe it is a target of the DOJ investigation.  The New Zealand
Commerce Commission notified the Company on February 17, 2006 that it is also
investigating whether the Company and certain other cargo carriers entered into
agreements relating to fuel surcharges, security surcharges, war risk
surcharges, and customs clearance surcharges.  On February 22, 2006, the
Company received a letter from the Swiss Competition Commission informing the
Company that it too is investigating whether the Company and certain other cargo
carriers entered into agreements relating to fuel surcharges, security
surcharges, war risk surcharges, and customs clearance surcharges.  On
March 11, 2008, the Company received from the Swiss Competition Commission a
request for information concerning, among other things, the scope and
organization of the Company’s activities in Switzerland.  On December
19, 2006 and June 12, 2007, the Company received requests for information from
the European Commission seeking information regarding the Company's corporate
structure, and revenue and pricing announcements for air cargo shipments to and
from the European Union. On January 23, 2007, the Brazilian competition
authorities, as part of an ongoing investigation, conducted an unannounced
search of the Company’s cargo facilities in Sao Paulo, Brazil.  On
April 28, 2008, the Brazilian competition authorities preliminarily charged the
Company with violating Brazilian competition laws.  The authorities
are investigating whether the Company and certain other foreign and domestic air
carriers violated Brazilian competition laws by illegally conspiring to set fuel
surcharges on cargo shipments.  The Company is vigorously contesting
the allegations and the preliminary findings of the Brazilian competition
authorities.  On June 27, 2007 and October 31, 2007, the Company
received requests for information from the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission seeking information regarding fuel surcharges imposed by the Company
on cargo shipments to and from Australia and regarding the structure of the
Company's cargo operations. On September 1, 2008, the Company received a request
from the Korea Fair Trade Commission seeking information regarding cargo rates
and surcharges and the structure of the Company’s activities in Korea. On December 18, 2007, the
European Commission issued a Statement of Objection (“SO”) against 26 airlines,
including the Company.  The SO alleges that these carriers
participated in a conspiracy to set surcharges on cargo shipments in violation
of EU law.  The SO states that, in the event that the allegations in
the SO are affirmed, the Commission will impose fines against the
Company.  The Company intends to vigorously contest the allegations
and findings in the SO under EU laws, and it intends to cooperate fully with all
other pending investigations. In the event that the SO is affirmed or other
investigations uncover violations of the U.S. antitrust laws or the competition
laws of some other jurisdiction, or if the Company were named and found liable
in any litigation based on these allegations, such findings and related legal
proceedings could have a material adverse impact on the
Company.  

Approximately
44 purported class action lawsuits have been filed in the U.S. against the
Company and certain foreign and domestic air carriers alleging that the
defendants violated U.S. antitrust laws by illegally conspiring to set prices
and surcharges on cargo shipments.  These cases, along with other
purported class action lawsuits in which the Company was not named, were
consolidated in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New
York as In re Air
Cargo Shipping Services Antitrust Litigation, 06-MD-1775 on June 20,
2006.  Plaintiffs are
seeking trebled money damages and injunctive relief.  The Company has
not been named as a defendant in the consolidated complaint filed by the
plaintiffs.  However, the plaintiffs have not released any claims that
they may have against the Company, and the Company may later be added as a
defendant in the litigation.  If the Company is sued on these claims,
it will vigorously defend the suit, but any adverse judgment could have a
material adverse impact on the Company.  Also, on January 23, 2007,
the Company was served with a purported class action complaint filed against the
Company, American, and certain foreign and domestic air carriers in the Supreme
Court of British Columbia in Canada (McKay v. Ace Aviation
Holdings, et al.). The plaintiff alleges that the defendants violated
Canadian competition laws by illegally conspiring to set prices and surcharges
on cargo shipments.  The complaint seeks compensatory and punitive damages
under Canadian law.  On June 22, 2007, the plaintiffs agreed to dismiss
their claims against the Company.  The dismissal is without prejudice
and the Company could be brought back into the litigation at a future
date.  If litigation is recommenced against the Company in the
Canadian courts, the Company will vigorously defend itself; however, any adverse
judgment could have a material adverse impact on the Company.

On June
20, 2006, the DOJ served the Company with a grand jury subpoena as part of an
ongoing investigation into possible criminal violations of the antitrust laws by
certain domestic and foreign passenger carriers.  At this time, the
Company does not believe it is a target of the DOJ investigation.  The
Company intends to cooperate fully with this investigation.  On
September 4, 2007, the Attorney General of the State of Florida served the
Company with a Civil Investigative Demand as part of its investigation of
possible violations of federal and Florida antitrust laws regarding the pricing
of air passenger transportation.  In the event that this or other
investigations uncover violations of the U.S. antitrust laws or the competition
laws of some other jurisdiction, such findings and related legal proceedings
could have a material adverse impact on the Company.







Approximately
52 purported class action lawsuits have been filed in the U.S. against the
Company and certain foreign and domestic air carriers alleging that the
defendants violated U.S. antitrust laws by illegally conspiring to set prices
and surcharges for passenger transportation.  On October 25, 2006,
these cases, along with other purported class action lawsuits in which the
Company was not named, were consolidated in the United States District Court for
the Northern District of California as In re International Air
Transportation Surcharge Antitrust Litigation, Civ. No. 06-1793 (the
“Passenger MDL”).  On July 9, 2007, the Company was named as a
defendant in the Passenger MDL.  On August 25, 2008, the plaintiffs
dismissed their claims against the Company in this action.  On March
13, 2008, and March 14, 2008, two additional purported class action complaints,
Turner v. American Airlines, et al., Civ. No. 08-1444 (N.D. Cal.), and LaFlamme
v. American Airlines, et al., Civ. No. 08-1079 (E.D.N.Y.), were filed against
the Company, alleging that the Company violated U.S. antitrust laws by illegally
conspiring to set prices and surcharges for passenger transportation in Japan
and certain European countries, respectively.  The Turner plaintiffs
have failed to perfect service against the Company, and it is unclear whether
they intend to pursue their claims.  On February 17, 2009, the LaFlamme
plaintiffs agreed to dismiss their claims against the Company without
prejudice.  In the event that the Turner plaintiffs pursue their claims or
the LaFlamme plaintiffs re-file claims against the Company, the Company will
vigorously defend these lawsuits, but any adverse judgment in these actions
could have a material adverse impact on the Company.

On August
21, 2006, a patent infringement lawsuit was filed against American and American
Beacon Advisors, Inc. (then a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company) in the
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas (Ronald A. Katz Technology
Licensing, L.P. v. American Airlines, Inc., et al.).  This case
has been consolidated in the Central District of California for pre-trial
purposes with numerous other cases brought by the plaintiff against other
defendants.  On December 1, 2008, the court dismissed with prejudice
all claims against American Beacon.  The plaintiff alleges that
American infringes a number of the plaintiff’s patents, each of which relates to
automated telephone call processing systems.  The plaintiff is seeking
past and future royalties, injunctive relief, costs and attorneys'
fees.  Although the Company believes that the plaintiff’s claims are
without merit and is vigorously defending the lawsuit, a final adverse court
decision awarding substantial money damages or placing material restrictions on
existing automated telephone call system operations would have a material
adverse impact on the Company.
 

















ITEM
4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS

No
matters were submitted to a vote of the Company's security holders during the
last quarter of its fiscal year ended December 31, 2008.

Executive Officers of the
Registrant

The
following information relates to the executive officers of AMR as of the filing
of this Form 10-K.




 
      
 
      
 
      



Gerard
      J. Arpey

 
      

Mr.
      Arpey was elected Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of AMR
      and American in May 2004.  He was elected Chief Executive
      Officer of AMR and American in April 2003.  He served as
      President and Chief Operating Officer of AMR and American from April 2002
      to April 2003. He served as Executive Vice President – Operations of
      American from January 2000 to April 2002, Chief Financial Officer of AMR
      from 1995 through 2000 and Senior Vice President – Planning of American
      from 1992 to January 1995.  Prior to that, he served in various
      management positions at American since 1982.  Age
      50.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Daniel
      P. Garton

 
      

Mr.
      Garton was elected Executive Vice President – Marketing of American in
      September 2002.  He is also an Executive Vice President of
      AMR.  He served as Executive Vice President – Customer Services
      of American from January 2000 to September 2002 and Senior Vice President
      – Customer Services of American from 1998 to January
      2000.  Prior to that, he served as President of AMR Eagle from
      1995 to 1998.  Except for two years service as Senior Vice
      President and Chief Financial Officer of Continental between 1993 and
      1995, he has been with the Company in various management positions since
      1984.  Age 51.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Thomas
      W. Horton

 
      

Mr.
      Horton was elected Executive Vice President of Finance and Planning and
      Chief Financial Officer of AMR and American in March 2006 upon returning
      to American from AT&T Corp., a telecommunications company, where he
      had been Vice Chairman and Chief Financial Officer.  Prior to
      leaving for AT&T Corp., Mr. Horton was Senior Vice President and Chief
      Financial Officer of AMR and American from January 2000 to
      2002.  From 1994 to January 2000 Mr. Horton served as a Vice
      President of American and has served in various management positions of
      American since 1985. Age 47.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Robert
      W. Reding

 
      

Mr.
      Reding was elected Executive Vice President – Operations for American in
      September 2007.  He is also an Executive Vice President of
      AMR.  He served as Senior Vice President – Technical Operations
      for American from May 2003 to September 2007.  He joined the
      Company in March 2000 and served as Chief Operations Officer of AMR Eagle
      through May 2003.  Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Reding
      served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Reno Air from 1992 to
      1998 and President and Chief Executive Officer of Canadian Regional
      Airlines from 1998 to March 2000.  Age 59.



 
      
 
      
 
      



Gary
      F. Kennedy

 
      

Mr.
      Kennedy was elected Senior Vice President and General Counsel of AMR and
      American in January 2003.  He is also the Company’s Chief
      Compliance Officer. He served as Vice President – Corporate Real Estate of
      American from 1996 to January 2003.  Prior to that, he served as
      an attorney and in various management positions at American since
      1984.  Age 53.



 
      
 
      
 
      




There are
no family relationships among the executive officers of the Company named
above.

There
have been no events under any bankruptcy act, no criminal proceedings, and no
judgments or injunctions material to the evaluation of the ability and integrity
of any director or executive officer during the past five
years.


 



 






 








PART
      II





ITEM
5.                 MARKET
FOR REGISTRANT'S COMMON STOCK AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS

The
Company's common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange (symbol
AMR).  The approximate number of record holders of the Company's
common stock at February 11, 2009 was 15,802.

The range
of closing market prices for AMR's common stock on the New York Stock Exchange
was:





 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 

High

 
 

Low

 
 

High

 
 

Low

 



Quarter
      Ended

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



March
      31

 
$
16.18
 
 
$
8.38
 
 
$
40.66
 
 
$
30.14
 



June
      30

 
 
10.32
 
 
 
5.12
 
 
 
33.12
 
 
 
25.34
 



September
      30

 
 
13.00
 
 
 
4.41
 
 
 
28.83
 
 
 
20.77
 



December
      31

 
 
11.97
 
 
 
6.45
 
 
 
25.64
 
 
 
14.03
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




No cash
dividends on common stock were declared for any period during 2008 or 2007, and
the Company has no intention of paying dividends in the foreseeable
future.







 



 






 



ITEM
6.                 SELECTED
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA




 
(in
      millions, except per share amounts)









 
      
 
 
2008 2,5
 
 
 
2007 4
 
 
 
2006
      1
 
 
 
2005
      1,
    6
 
 
 
2004
      1,
    6
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      operating revenues

 
$
23,766
 
 
$
22,935
 
 
$
22,563
 
 
$
20,712
 
 
$
18,645
 



Operating
      income (loss)

 
 
(1,889
)
 
 
965
 
 
 
1,060
 
 
 
(89
)
 
 
(134
)



Net
      income (loss)

 
 
(2,071
)
 
 
504
 
 
 
231
 
 
 
(857
)
 
 
(751
)



Net
      income (loss) per share:
Basic

 
 
(7.98
)
 
 
2.06
 
 
 
1.13
 
 
 
(5.18
)
 
 
(4.68
)



      Diluted

 
 
(7.98
)
 
 
1.78
 
 
 
0.98
 
 
 
(5.18
)
 
 
(4.68
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      assets

 
 
25,175
 
 
 
28,571
 
 
 
29,145
 
 
 
29,495
 
 
 
28,773
 



Long-term
      debt, less current maturities

 
 
 8,419
 
 
 
9,413
 
 
 
11,217
 
 
 
12,530
 
 
 
12,436
 



Obligations
      under capital leases, less current obligations

 
 
  582
 
 
 
  680
 
 
 
  824
 
 
 
  926
 
 
 
  1,088
 



Obligation
      for pension and postretirement benefits

 
 
6,614
 
 
 
3,620
 
 
 
5,341
 
 
 
4,998
 
 
 
4,743
 



Stockholders’
      equity (deficit) 3

 
 
(2,935
)
 
 
2,657
 
 
 
(606
)
 
 
(1,430
)
 
 
(537
)









1  


Includes
      the impact of adopting FSP AUG AIR-1 “Accounting for Planned Major
      Maintenance Activities”.








2  


Includes
      restructuring charges.  In 2008, these restructuring charges
      consisted of $1.2 billion primarily related to aircraft and employee
      charges due to announced capacity reductions (for further discussion of
      these items, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial
      statements).








3  


Effective
      December 31, 2006, the Company adopted SFAS 158 “Employers’ Accounting for
      Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans”.  This
      adoption decreased Stockholders’ equity by $1.0 billion and increased the
      obligation for pension and other postretirement benefits by $880
      million.  As a result of actuarial changes including the
      discount rate and the impact of legislation changing pilot retirement age
      to 65, the Company recorded a $1.7 billion reduction in pension and
      retiree medical and other benefits and a corresponding increase in
      stockholders’ equity in 2007.  As a result of a significant
      decline in market value in 2008, the Company recorded a $3.0 billion
      increase in pension and retiree medical and other benefits and a similar
      decrease in stockholders’ equity in 2008.  In 2008, the Company
      incurred $103 million in expense due to a pension settlement (for further
      discussion, see Note 10 to the consolidated financial
      statements).








4  


Includes
      the impact of the $138 million gain on the sale of ARINC as described in
      Note 3 to the consolidated financial
statements.








5  


Includes
      the impact of the $432 million gain on the sale of American Beacon
      Advisors as described in Note 14 to the consolidated financial
      statements.








6  


Includes
      the impact of adopting Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
      123(R), “Share-Based Payment”.





No cash
dividends were declared on AMR’s common shares during any of the periods
above.

Information
on the comparability of results is included in Item 7, “Management's Discussion
and Analysis” and the notes to the consolidated financial
statements.


 



 






 



ITEM
7.                 MANAGEMENT'S
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

Forward-Looking
Information

The
discussions under Business, Risk Factors, Properties and Legal Proceedings, and
the following discussions under “Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Quantitative and Qualitative
Disclosures about Market Risk” contain various forward-looking statements within
the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which represent
the Company's expectations or beliefs concerning future events.  When
used in this document and in documents incorporated herein by reference, the
words "expects," "plans," "anticipates," “indicates,” “believes,” “forecast,”
“guidance,” “outlook,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “seeks,” “targets” and similar
expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking
statements include, without limitation, the Company’s expectations concerning
operations and financial conditions, including changes in capacity, revenues,
and costs, future financing plans and needs, overall economic and industry
conditions, plans and objectives for future operations, regulatory approvals and
actions, including the Company’s application for antitrust immunity with other
oneworld alliance
members, and the impact on the Company of its results of operations in recent
years and the sufficiency of its financial resources to absorb that
impact.  Other forward-looking statements include statements which do
not relate solely to historical facts, such as, without limitation, statements
which discuss the possible future effects of current known trends or
uncertainties, or which indicate that the future effects of known trends or
uncertainties cannot be predicted, guaranteed or assured.  All
forward-looking statements in this report are based upon information available
to the Company on the date of this report.  The Company undertakes no
obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether
as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.  Guidance
given in this report regarding capacity, fuel consumption, fuel prices, fuel
hedging, and unit costs, and statements regarding expectations of regulatory
approval of the Company’s application for antitrust immunity with other oneworld members are
forward-looking statements.  The Risk Factors listed in Item 1A, in
addition to other possible factors not listed, could cause the Company's actual
results to differ materially from historical results and from those expressed in
forward-looking statements.

Overview

After
earning a modest profit in 2006 and 2007, in 2008 the Company was severely
challenged by the difficulties of very high fuel prices (oil prices reached a
record price of $147 per barrel in July 2008) and a rapidly deteriorating
economy in the second half of the year. In reaction to these challenges,
throughout 2008 the Company implemented several key actions designed to help it
manage through these near-term challenges while continuing to position the
Company for long-term success.

In
response to soaring jet fuel prices, in May 2008 the Company announced capacity
cuts to take effect during the last four months of 2008 as it attempted to
create a more sustainable supply-demand balance in the market.  At the
same time, in an effort to generate more revenue, the Company introduced a range
of new service charges, such as a service charge for a first checked bag, that
were expected to generate incremental annual revenue of several hundred million
dollars.

The
Company also continued to focus on strengthening its balance sheet and executing
on its fleet renewal and replacement plan, as further described below, and
implemented a number of initiatives to improve its dependability and on-time
performance.  In addition, the Company continues to look for ways to
strengthen its global network, and in August 2008 the Company, along with four
fellow members of the oneworld global alliance,
filed an application with the U.S. Department of Transportation for global
antitrust immunity.



 



 






 



The
Company recorded a net loss of $2.1 billion in 2008 compared to net earnings of
$504 million in 2007.  The Company’s 2008 results include an
impairment charge of $1.1 billion to write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and
Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related long-lived assets down to their
estimated fair values, a $71 million accrual for employee severance costs, and a
$33 million expense related to the grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft
prior to lease expiration (all in connection with announced capacity
reductions).  Early pilot retirements resulted in $917 million in
total lump sum payments to 517 pilot retirees (approximately $1.8 million per
retiree consisting of payments from Company-funded defined benefit and defined
contribution plan trusts) for which the Company incurred a $103 million
settlement charge.  The capacity reduction and impairment charges are
described in Note 2 and the pension settlement charge is described in Note 10 to
the consolidated financial statements.  In addition, the Company’s
2008 results include the sale of American Beacon for a net gain of $432 million
described in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements.

The
Company’s 2008 net operating loss also reflects a dramatic year-over-year
increase in fuel prices from an average of $2.13 per gallon in 2007 to an
average of $3.03 per gallon in 2008.  Fuel expense has become the
Company’s largest single expense category and the price increase resulted in
$2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel expense in 2008 (based on the
year-over-year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied by gallons
consumed, inclusive of the impact of fuel hedging).  Although fuel
prices have abated somewhat from the record prices recorded in July 2008, fuel
prices are still extremely volatile by historical standards.

The
significant rise in fuel price was partially offset by higher unit revenues
(passenger revenue per available seat mile).  Mainline passenger unit
revenues increased 7.3 percent for the year due to an 8.6 percent increase in
passenger yield (passenger revenue per passenger mile) partially offset by an
approximately one point load factor decrease compared to
2007.  Although passenger yield showed year-over-year improvement,
passenger yield remains essentially flat with the levels set in 2000 despite
cumulative inflation of approximately 25 percent over the same time
frame.  The Company believes this is the result of a fragmented
industry with numerous competitors and excess capacity, increased low cost
carrier competition, increased price competition due to the internet, and other
factors.  Since deregulation in 1978, the Company’s passenger yield
has increased 85 percent, while the Consumer Price Index (CPI), as measured by
the US Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics, has grown by 226
percent.  The Company believes increases in passenger yield will
continue to significantly lag CPI indefinitely.

The
Company’s efforts to drive continuous revenue and cost improvement under the
Turnaround Plan are ongoing.  This plan was established in 2003 and is
the Company’s strategic framework for achieving sustained profitability and has
four tenets: (i) lower costs to compete, (ii) fly smart – give customers what
they value, (iii) pull together, win together and (iv) build a financial
foundation.

Although
the Company’s cost per available seat mile increased from 11.54 cents in 2002 to
14.57 cents in 2008, the fuel component of unit cost increased from 1.43 cents
to 5.12 cents over the same period.  All other components of unit cost
decreased from 10.11 cents in 2002 to 9.45 cents in 2008, or 6.5 percent.
However, the Company’s 2008 unit costs excluding fuel were greater than in 2007,
and are expected to increase in 2009 compared to 2008.  Factors
driving the 2009 increase include increased defined benefit pension expenses and
retiree medical and other expenses (due to the stock market decline), and cost
pressures associated with the Company’s previously announced capacity reductions
and dependability initiatives.

The
Company has also implemented numerous efforts to find additional revenue sources
and increase existing ones.  In addition to improving core passenger
and cargo revenues, these efforts have contributed to an increase in Other
revenue from $1.4 billion (as reclassified by change in presentation for certain
passenger revenues – see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements) in
2002 to $2.2 billion in 2008.  Examples of new revenue sources over
this period include checked baggage service charges, flight change service
charges, onboard food sales, single day passes for AAdmirals Club admission,
reservations ticketing service charges, First Class upgrades on day of
departure, and numerous other initiatives.



 



 






 



Lastly,
under the Turnaround Plan, the Company has worked to reduce debt, continued to
make contributions to employee pension plans and improve financial flexibility
for the future.  Historically, airline industry earnings are highly
cyclical with frequent and extended periods of significant losses, and an
airline’s liquidity and borrowing capacity can be critical to sustaining
operations.  The Company has reduced its balance sheet debt
(Short-Term Debt plus Long-Term Debt) from $13.2 billion at the end of 2002 to
$11.0 billion at year end 2008.  Over the same period, Cash and
Short-term investments (including restricted cash and short-term investments)
have increased by $900 million to $3.6 billion.  However, the
Company’s Cash and Short-term investments (including restricted cash and
short-term investments) decreased in 2008 due primarily to debt repayments,
increased fuel expense and fuel hedge collateral as discussed in the “Liquidity
and Capital Resources” section of Item 7.

Although
the ratio of the fair value of plan assets to the accumulated benefit
obligations of the employee pension programs has decreased from 75 percent to 70
percent during this same period due to a significant decrease in the value of
assets from the recent decline in the stock market, the Company has contributed
$2.1 billion to the employee pension plans from 2002 through the end of
2008.

The
Company made several announcements during 2008.  In August 2008,
American entered into a joint business agreement and related marketing
arrangements with UK carrier, British Airways, and Spanish carrier, Iberia,
providing for commercial cooperation by the carriers on flights between North
America (consisting of the United States, Canada and Mexico) and Europe
(consisting of the European Union, Switzerland and Norway).  The
agreement contemplates the pooling and sharing of certain revenues and costs on
transatlantic flights, expanded codesharing on each other’s flights, enhanced
frequent flyer program reciprocity, and cooperation in the areas of planning,
marketing and certain operations.  These agreements were signed in
connection with an application to the U.S. Department of Transportation by the
carriers for antitrust immunity to permit global cooperation.  The
application also included the Finnish carrier, Finnair, and the Jordanian
carrier, Royal Jordanian.  If granted (which cannot be assured),
antitrust immunity will permit the five carriers, all of whom are members of the
oneworld airline
alliance, to deepen cooperation on a bilateral and multilateral
basis.

Implementation
of the joint business agreement and related arrangements is subject to
conditions, including various U.S. and foreign regulatory approvals, successful
negotiation of certain detailed financial and commercial arrangements, and other
approvals.  Agencies from which regulatory approvals must be obtained
may impose requirements or limitations as a condition of granting such
approvals, such as requiring divestiture of routes, gates, slots or other
assets.

The
Company also continued its fleet renewal strategy as it entered into various
amendments to its 737-800 purchase agreement with the Boeing
Company.   Giving effect to the amendments and considering the
impact of delays caused by Boeing’s recent machinist strike, the Company is now
committed to take delivery of a total of 29 737-800 aircraft in 2009, 39 737-800
aircraft in 2010 and eight 737-800 aircraft in 2011.  In addition to
these aircraft, the Company has firm commitments for eleven 737-800 aircraft and
seven Boeing 777 aircraft scheduled to be delivered in 2013 - 2016.

In
addition, the Company entered into a new purchase agreement with Boeing for the
acquisition of 42 Boeing 787-9 aircraft.  The Boeing 787-9 purchase
agreement contains certain contingency provisions including provisions which
allow American to cancel the contract under certain circumstances, which are
described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources subsection of Item
7.  “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations”.  The agreement also includes purchase rights
to acquire up to 58 additional Boeing 787 aircraft.

In 2007,
the Company had announced the intended divestiture of AMR Eagle, its
wholly-owned regional carrier.  Given the current industry
environment, the Company announced in 2008 that it had decided to place on hold
its planned divestiture until industry conditions were more stable and
favorable.  The Company continues to believe that a divestiture of AMR
Eagle makes sense in the long term for the Company, American, AMR Eagle and
their stakeholders, but the Company also believes that a divestiture is not
sensible amid current conditions.



 



 






 



The Company’s ability to
return to profitability and its ability to continue to fund its obligations on
an ongoing basis will depend on a number of factors, many of which are largely
beyond the Company’s control.  Certain risk factors that affect
the Company’s business and financial results are discussed in the Risk Factors
listed in Item 1A.  In addition, most of the Company’s largest
domestic competitors and several smaller carriers have filed for bankruptcy in
the last several years and have used this process to significantly reduce
contractual labor and other costs.  In order to remain competitive and
to improve its financial condition, the Company must continue to take steps to
generate additional revenues and to reduce its costs.  Although the
Company has a number of initiatives underway to address its cost and revenue
challenges, the adequacy and ultimate success of these initiatives is not known
at this time and cannot be assured.  It will be very difficult for the
Company to continue to fund its obligations on an ongoing basis, and to return
to profitability, if the overall industry revenue environment does not improve
substantially and if fuel prices were to increase and persist for an extended
period at high levels.

Liquidity and Capital
Resources

Cash, Short-Term Investments and
Restricted Assets    At December 31, 2008, the
Company had $3.1 billion in unrestricted cash and short-term investments and
$459 million in restricted cash and short-term investments, both at fair value,
versus $4.5 billion in unrestricted cash and short-term investments and $428
million in restricted cash and short-term investments in
2007.  Despite the current credit crisis and its deteriorating impact
on the measurement of the fair value of investments, the Company had no
short-term investments that had permanently declined in value, nor did it own
any auction rate securities.  As of December 31, 2008, the Company had
recorded approximately $10 million of unrealized loss in other comprehensive
income related to its short-term investments.

Significant Indebtedness and Future
Financing   Indebtedness is a significant risk to the
Company as discussed in the Risk Factors listed in Item 1A.  During
2006, 2007 and 2008, the Company raised an aggregate of approximately $2.4
billion in financing to fund capital commitments (mainly for aircraft and ground
properties), debt maturities, and employee pension obligations, and to bolster
its liquidity.  As of the date of this Form 10-K, the Company believes
that it should have sufficient liquidity to fund its operations for the near
term, including repayment of debt and capital leases, capital expenditures and
other contractual obligations, including those relating to the anticipated
delivery of 76 Boeing 737-800 aircraft that American is now committed to acquire
in 2009 through 2011.

In 2009,
the Company will be required to make approximately $1.8 billion of principal
payments on long-term debt and approximately $110 million in principal payments
on capital leases, and the Company expects to spend approximately $1.6 billion
on capital expenditures, including the aircraft commitments described in the
preceding paragraph.  In addition, the global economic downturn,
potential increases in the amount of required reserves under credit card
processing agreements, and the obligation to post cash collateral to secure loss
positions on fuel hedging contracts, also pose challenges to our
liquidity.  To maintain sufficient liquidity and because the Company
has significant debt, lease and other obligations in the next several years,
including commitments to purchase aircraft, as well as significant pension
funding obligations (refer to Contractual Obligations in this Item 7), the
Company will need access to substantial additional funding.

The
Company’s possible financing sources primarily include: (i) a limited amount of
additional secured aircraft debt or sale leaseback transactions involving owned
aircraft; (ii) debt secured by new aircraft deliveries; (iii) debt secured by
other assets; (iv) securitization of future operating receipts; (v) the sale or
monetization of certain assets; (vi) unsecured debt; and (vii) issuance of
equity and/or equity-like securities. Besides unencumbered aircraft, some of the
Company’s particular assets and other sources of liquidity that could be sold or
otherwise used as sources of financing include AAdvantage program miles, route
authorities and takeoff and landing slots, and certain of the Company’s business
units and subsidiaries, such as AMR Eagle.  The Company’s ability to
obtain future financing is limited by the value of its unencumbered
assets.  A very large majority of the Company’s aircraft assets
(including most of the aircraft eligible for the benefits of Section 1110
of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code) are encumbered.  Also, the market value
of these aircraft assets has declined in recent years, and may continue to
decline.  The Company believes it has at least $3.5 billion in
unencumbered assets and other sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2008. However, the
availability and level of the financing sources described above cannot be
assured, particularly in light of the Company’s and American’s financial results
in recent years, the Company’s and American’s substantial indebtedness, the
difficult revenue environment they face, their reduced credit ratings, recent
historically high fuel prices, and the financial difficulties experienced in the
airline industry.  In addition, the global economic downturn and
recent severe disruptions in the capital markets and other sources of funding have resulted in greater
volatility, less liquidity, widening of credit spreads and substantially more
limited availability of funding.  The inability of the Company to
obtain necessary funding on acceptable terms would have a material adverse
impact on the Company and on its ability to sustain its operations.







The
Company’s substantial indebtedness and other obligations have important
consequences.  For example, they: (i) limit the Company’s ability to
obtain additional funding for working capital, capital expenditures,
acquisitions and general corporate purposes, and adversely affect the terms on
which such funding could be obtained; (ii) require the Company to dedicate a
substantial portion of its cash flow from operations to payments on its
indebtedness and other obligations, thereby reducing the funds available for
other purposes; (iii) make the Company more vulnerable to economic downturns;
and (iv) limit the Company’s ability to withstand competitive pressures and
reduce its flexibility in responding to changing business and economic
conditions.

Under the
Company’s Boeing 737-800 and Boeing 777-200 purchase agreements, payments for
the related aircraft purchase commitments will be approximately $1.0 billion in
2009, $1.1 billion in 2010, $355 million in 2011, $218 million in 2012, $417
million in 2013 and $584 million for 2014 and beyond.  These amounts
are net of purchase deposits currently held by the manufacturer.

In
October 2008, the Company entered into a sale leaseback agreement for 20 of the
76 Boeing 737-800 aircraft to be delivered in 2009 - 2011.  Such financing
is subject to certain terms and conditions including a minimum liquidity
requirement.  In addition, the Company had previously arranged for backstop
financing which covered a significant portion of the remaining 2009 - 2011
Boeing 737-800 aircraft deliveries.  As a result, all of the Company’s
737-800 aircraft purchase commitments for 2009 - 2011 will be covered by
committed financing except for approximately $195 million, substantially all of
which is due in the fourth quarter of 2010.

In
October 2008, the Company entered into a new purchase agreement with Boeing for
the acquisition of 42 Boeing 787-9 aircraft.  Per the purchase
agreement, the first such aircraft is scheduled to be delivered in 2012, and the
last is scheduled to be delivered in 2018. The agreement also
includes purchase rights to acquire up to 58 additional Boeing 787 aircraft,
with deliveries between 2015 and 2020.  Based on preliminary
information received from Boeing on the impact of the overall Boeing 787
program delay to
American’s delivery positions due to the strike in 2008, the Company now
believes the first of the initial 42 aircraft will be delivered during the
second half of 2013.  The first of the 58 optional purchase rights
aircraft would be delivered in the second half of 2016 based on the same
preliminary information. Under the 787-9 purchase
agreement, except as described below, American will not be obligated to purchase
a 787-9 aircraft unless it gives Boeing notice confirming its election to do so
at least 18 months prior to the scheduled delivery date for that
aircraft.  If American does not give that notice with respect to an
aircraft, the aircraft will be no longer subject to the 787-9 purchase
agreement.  These confirmation rights may be exercised until May 1,
2013, provided that those rights will terminate earlier if American reaches a
collective bargaining agreement with its pilot union that includes provisions
enabling American to utilize the 787-9 to American’s satisfaction in the
operations desired by American, or if American confirms its election to purchase
any of the initial 42 787-9 aircraft.  While there can be no
assurances, American expects to have reached an agreement as described above
with its pilots union prior to the first notification date.  In either
of those events, American would become obligated to purchase all of the initial
42 aircraft then subject to the purchase agreement.  If neither of
those events occur prior to May 1, 2013, then on that date American may elect to
purchase all of the initial 42 aircraft then subject to the purchase agreement,
and if it does not elect to do so, the purchase agreement will terminate in its
entirety.
  .
The
Company’s continued aircraft replacement strategy, and its execution of that
strategy, will depend on such factors as future economic and industry conditions
and the financial condition of the Company.

Credit
Ratings  AMR’s and American’s credit ratings are significantly
below investment grade.  Additional reductions in AMR's or American's
credit ratings could further increase its borrowing or other costs and further
restrict the availability of future financing.

Credit Facility
Covenants   American has a secured bank credit facility
which consists of a fully drawn $255 million revolving credit facility with a
final maturity on June 17, 2009, and a fully drawn $436 million term loan
facility, with a final maturity on December 17, 2010 (the Revolving Facility and
the Term Loan Facility, respectively, and collectively,
the Credit Facility).   



 



 






 



The
Credit Facility contains a covenant (the Liquidity Covenant) requiring American
to maintain, as defined, unrestricted cash, unencumbered short-term investments
and amounts available for drawing under committed revolving credit facilities of
not less than $1.25 billion for each quarterly period through the life of the
Credit Facility.  AMR and American were in compliance with the
Liquidity Covenant as of December 31, 2008, and expect to be able to continue to
comply with this covenant in the near term.  In addition, the Credit
Facility contains a covenant (the EBITDAR Covenant) requiring AMR to maintain a
ratio of cash flow (defined as consolidated net income, before interest expense
(less capitalized interest), income taxes, depreciation and amortization and
rentals, adjusted for certain gains or losses and non-cash items) to fixed
charges (comprising interest expense (less capitalized interest) and
rentals).  In May 2008, AMR and American entered into an amendment to
the Credit Facility which waived compliance with the EBITDAR Covenant for
periods ending on any date from and including June 30, 2008 through March 31,
2009, and which reduced the minimum ratios AMR is required to satisfy
thereafter.  The required ratio will be 0.90 to 1.00 for the one
quarter period ending June 30, 2009 and will increase to 1.15 to 1.00 for the
four quarter period ending September 30, 2010.  Given fuel prices that
have been very high by historical standards and the volatility of fuel prices
and revenues, uncertainty in the capital markets and about other sources of
funding, and other factors, it is difficult to assess whether the Company will
be able to continue to comply with these covenants, and there are no assurances
that it will be able to do so.  Failure to comply with these covenants
would result in a default under the Credit Facility which – if the Company did
not take steps to obtain a waiver of, or otherwise mitigate, the default – could
result in a default under a significant amount of its other debt and lease
obligations, and otherwise have a material adverse impact on the Company and on
its ability to sustain its operations.

Credit Card Processing and Other
Reserves   American has agreements with a number of credit
card companies and processors to accept credit cards for the sale of air travel
and other services.  Under certain of American’s current credit card
processing agreements, the related credit card company or processor may hold
back, under certain circumstances, a reserve from American’s credit card
receivables.  American was not required to maintain any reserve under
these agreements in 2008.

Under one
such agreement, the amount of such reserve may be based on, among other things,
the amount of unrestricted cash (not including undrawn credit facilities) held
by American and American’s debt service coverage ratio, as defined in the
agreement.  In order to mitigate the impact of this potential reserve,
the Company drew down its $255 million revolving credit facility in September
2008.   Based on the Company’s current agreement, as amended in
2008, no reserves were required in 2008.  Given the volatility of fuel
prices and revenues, it is difficult to forecast the required amount of such
reserve at any time. The Company’s maximum holdback exposure is $200 million
through August 15, 2009.  However, if current conditions persist,
absent a waiver or modification of the agreement, such required amount could be
significantly greater than $200 million in the latter half of 2009.

Cash Flow
Activity   The Company’s cash flow
used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2008 was $1.4
billion and was primarily due to the dramatic year-over-year increase in
fuel prices which resulted in $2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel
expense in 2008 (based on the year-over-year increase in the average price per
gallon multiplied by gallons consumed).

Capital
expenditures during 2008 were $876 million and primarily included aircraft
purchase deposits and aircraft modifications.  See Note 6 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information.

In 2008,
the Company reduced long-term debt and capital lease obligations (including
current maturities) by $185 million, while pursuing opportunities to generate
more cash through several transactions.  During 2008, the Company
raised $924 million through sale leasebacks of certain aircraft and loans
secured by aircraft.  In addition, AMR completed a public offering of
27.1 million shares of its common stock, generating net proceeds of $294
million.

The
Company also made scheduled and unscheduled debt and capital lease payments of
$1.1 billion in 2008.  Included in this amount, AMR purchased with
cash the $300 million principal amount of the 4.25 percent senior convertible
notes due 2023.  The holders of the 4.25 Notes exercised their
elective put rights and the Company purchased and retired these notes at a price
equal to 100 percent of their principal amount.  Under the terms of
the 4.25 Notes, the Company had the option to pay the purchase price with cash,
stock, or a combination of cash and stock, and the Company elected to pay for
the 4.25 Notes solely with cash.



 



 






 



Further,
the Company drew down its $255 million revolving credit facility in
2008.  The draw on the credit facility was intended to reduce the
amount of a potential credit card holdback reserve that could have been imposed
in the fourth quarter of 2008 based on the terms of one of the Company’s credit
card processing agreements.  The amount of the holdback reserve from
such agreement may be based on, among other things, the amount of unrestricted
cash (which does not include undrawn credit facilities) held by the Company and
the Company’s debt service coverage ratio.

For the
year ended December 31, 2008, the Company recognized net gains of approximately
$380 million, as opposed to $239 million in 2007, as a component of fuel expense
related to its fuel hedging agreements, including the ineffective portion of the
hedges.  As a result of the rapid decline in energy prices in the
second half of 2008 and certain other events, the Company estimates during the
next twelve months it will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss
into earnings approximately $711 million in net incremental expenses related to
its fuel derivative hedges (based on prices as of December 31,
2008).  These hedging expenses, however, are substantially outweighed
by the overall reduction in fuel expense resulting from the same decline in fuel
prices.  See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for
additional information.

Due to
the current value of the Company’s derivative contracts, some agreements with
counterparties require collateral to be deposited by the Company.  As
of December 31, 2008, the cash collateral held by such counterparties from AMR
was $575 million.  The amount of collateral required to be deposited
with the Company or with the counterparty by the Company is based on fuel price
in relation to the market values of the derivative contracts and collateral
provisions per the terms of those contracts and can fluctuate
significantly.  These derivative contracts are currently required to
be collateralized at approximately 90 percent of the fair value of the liability
position.  As such, when these contracts settle (mainly in the first
half of 2009), the collateral posted with counterparties will effectively offset
the loss position and no further cash impact will be recorded assuming a static
forward heating oil curve from December 31, 2008.  Under the same
assumption, the Company does not currently expect to be required in 2009 to
deposit significant additional cash collateral above 2008 levels with
counterparties with regard to fuel hedges in place as of December 31,
2008.  Additional information regarding the Company’s fuel hedging
program is also included in Item 7(A) “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures
about Market Risk” and in Note 7 to the consolidated financial
statements.

In
September 2008, AMR completed the sale of American Beacon, which resulted in
total proceeds of $442 million and a net gain of $432 million.  The gain on
the sale is included in Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated
statement of operations.  While primarily a cash transaction, the
Company also maintained a minority equity stake in American Beacon.

In the
past, the Company has from time to time refinanced, redeemed or repurchased its
debt and taken other steps to reduce its debt or lease obligations or otherwise
improve its balance sheet.  Going forward, depending on market
conditions, its cash positions and other considerations, the Company may
continue to take such actions.

Compensation   On
January 27, 2009, the Company approved the 2009 Annual Incentive Plan (AIP) for
American.  All U.S. based employees of American are eligible to
participate in the AIP.  The AIP is American's annual bonus plan and
provides for the payment of awards in the event certain financial and/or
customer service metrics are satisfied.

Working
Capital   AMR (principally American) historically operates
with a working capital deficit, as do most other airline
companies.  In addition, the Company has historically relied heavily
on external financing to fund capital expenditures.  More recently,
the Company has also relied on external financing to fund operating losses,
employee pension obligations and debt maturities.

Off Balance Sheet
Arrangements   American has determined that it holds a
significant variable interest in, but is not the primary beneficiary of, certain
trusts that are the lessors under 84 of its aircraft operating leases. These
leases contain a fixed price purchase option, which allows American to purchase
the aircraft at a predetermined price on a specified date. However, American
does not guarantee the residual value of the aircraft.  As of December
31, 2008, future lease payments required under these leases totaled $1.7
billion.



 



 






 



Certain
special facility revenue bonds have been issued by certain municipalities
primarily to purchase equipment and improve airport facilities that are leased
by American and accounted for as operating leases.  Approximately $1.5
billion of these bonds (with total future payments of approximately $3.4 billion
as of December 31, 2008) are guaranteed by American, AMR, or
both.  Approximately $177 million of these special facility revenue
bonds contain mandatory tender provisions that require American to make
operating lease payments sufficient to repurchase the bonds at various times:
$112 million in 2014 and $65 million in 2015.  Although American has
the right to remarket the bonds, there can be no assurance that these bonds will
be successfully remarketed.  Any payments to redeem or purchase bonds
that are not remarketed would generally reduce existing rent leveling accruals
or be considered prepaid facility rentals and would reduce future operating
lease commitments.

In
addition, the Company had other operating leases, primarily for aircraft and
airport facilities, with total future lease payments of $4.1 billion as of
December 31, 2008.  Entering into aircraft leases allows the Company
to obtain aircraft without immediate cash outflows.



 



 






 



Contractual
Obligations

The
following table summarizes the Company’s obligations and commitments as of
December 31, 2008 (in millions):






 
      
 

Payments
      Due by Year(s) Ended December 31,

 



 
 
Contractual
      Obligations

 



 
Total

 
 



 
2009

 
 

2010
and
2011

 
 

2012
and
2013

 
 



2014
      and Beyond

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      lease payments for aircraft and facility obligations 1

 
 
9,187
 
 
 
998
 
 
 
1,854
 
 
 
1,391
 
 
 
4,944
 



Firm
      aircraft commitments 2

 
 
3,662
 
 
 
1,028
 
 
 
1,415
 
 
 
635
 
 
 
584
 



Capacity
      purchase agreements 3

 
 
205
 
 
 
68
 
 
 
120
 
 
 
17
 
 
 
-
 



Long-term
      debt 4

 
 
13,980
 
 
 
2,387
 
 
 
4,396
 
 
 
2,101
 
 
 
5,096
 



Capital
      lease obligations

 
 
1,127
 
 
 
182
 
 
 
289
 
 
 
180
 
 
 
476
 



Other
      purchase obligations 5

 
 
967
 
 
 
273
 
 
 
378
 
 
 
313
 
 
 
3
 



Other
      long-term liabilities 6

 
 
6,081
 
 
 
176
 
 
 
1,568
 
 
 
1,332
 
 
 
3,005
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      obligations and commitments

 
 
35,209
 
 
 
5,112
 
 
 
10,020
 
 
 
5,969
 
 
 
14,108
 










 
      


1


Certain
      special facility revenue bonds issued by municipalities - which are
      supported by operating leases executed by American - are guaranteed by AMR
      and/or American. The special facility revenue bonds with mandatory tender
      provisions discussed above are included in this table under their ultimate
      maturity date rather than their mandatory tender provision
      date.  See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for
      additional information.








 
      


2


As
      of December 31, 2008, the Company had firm commitments to acquire 29
      Boeing 737-800s in 2009, 39 Boeing 737-800s in 2010 and eight 737-800
      aircraft in 2011.  In addition to these aircraft, the Company
      has firm commitments for eleven 737-800 aircraft and seven Boeing 777
      aircraft scheduled to be delivered in 2013 - 2016.  Future
      payments for all aircraft, including the estimated amounts for price
      escalation, are currently estimated to be approximately $3.7 billion, with
      the majority occurring in 2009 through 2011.  Additional
      information about the Company’s obligations is included in Note 4 to the
      consolidated financial statements.








 
      


3


The
      table reflects minimum required payments under capacity purchase
      agreements between American and two regional airlines, Chautauqua
      Airlines, Inc. (Chautauqua) and Trans States Airlines, Inc.  If
      the Company terminates its contract with Chautauqua without cause,
      Chautauqua has the right to put its 15 Embraer aircraft to the
      Company.  If this were to happen, the Company would take
      possession of the aircraft and become liable for lease obligations
      totaling approximately $21 million per year with lease expirations in 2018
      and 2019.  These lease obligations are not included in the table
      above.  See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for
      additional information.








 
      


4


Amounts
      represent contractual amounts due, including interest.  Interest
      on variable rate debt was estimated based on the current rate at December
      31, 2008.








 
      5  
             


Includes
      noncancelable commitments to purchase goods or services, primarily
      information technology related support. The Company has made estimates as
      to the timing of certain payments primarily for construction related
      costs.  The actual timing of payments may vary from these
      estimates. Substantially all of the Company’s purchase orders issued for
      other purchases in the ordinary course of business contain a 30-day
      cancellation clause that allows the Company to cancel an order with 30
      days notice.








  
      6         


Includes
      minimum pension contributions based on actuarially determined estimates
      and other postretirement benefit payments based on estimated payments
      through 2017.  See Note 10 to the consolidated financial
      statements.





Pension
Obligations   The Company is required to make minimum
contributions to its defined benefit pension plans under the minimum funding
requirements of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), the Pension
Funding Equity Act of 2004 and the Pension Protection Act of 2006. The Company
is not required to make any 2009 contributions to its defined benefit pension
plans under the provisions of these acts.















The
Company’s obligation for pension and retiree medical and other benefits
increased from $3.6 billion at December 31, 2007 to $6.6 billion at December 31,
2008, largely the result of negative investment returns on the Company’s pension
assets in 2008 related to the broader stock market decline.  A
significant portion of this increase is recorded in Accumulated other
comprehensive loss, a component of stockholders’ equity. Consequently, the
Company’s 2009 pension expense will be substantially higher than in
2008.  Also, although the Company is not required to make
contributions to its defined benefit pension plans in 2009, based on current
funding levels of the plans, the Company expects that the amount of the required
contributions will be substantial in 2010 and future years (these estimates are
reflected in the above table).  The Company expects to contribute
approximately $13 million to its retiree medical and other benefit plan in
2009.

Results of
Operations

The
Company recorded a net loss of $2.1 billion in 2008 compared to net earnings of
$504 million in 2007.  The Company’s 2008 results include an
impairment charge of $1.1 billion to write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and
Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related long-lived assets down to their
estimated fair values, a $71 million accrual for employee severance cost and a
$33 million expense related to the grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft
prior to lease expiration, all in connection with announced capacity reductions
and included in Special charges in the Consolidated Statements of
Operations.  These charges are described in Note 2 to the consolidated
financial statements. In addition, the Company’s 2008 results include the sale
of American Beacon for a net gain of $432 million included in Miscellaneous-net
on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and the impact of a pension
settlement charge of $103 million for one of the Company’s defined benefit plans
included in Wages, salaries and benefits on the Consolidated Statements of
Operations and as described in Note 14 and Note 10, respectively.

The Company recorded net
earnings of $504 million in 2007 compared to $231 million in
2006.  The Company’s 2007 results reflected an improvement in revenues
somewhat offset by fuel prices and certain other costs that were higher in 2007
compared to 2006.  The 2007 and 2006 results were impacted by
productivity improvements and by cost reductions resulting from progress under
the Turnaround Plan.  The 2007 results include the impact of
several items including:  a $138 million gain on the sale of AMR’s
stake in ARINC included in Other Income, Miscellaneous – net, a $39 million gain
to reflect the positive impact of the change to an 18-month expiration of
AAdvantage miles included in Passenger revenue, and a $63 million charge
associated with the retirement and planned disposal of 24 MD-80 aircraft and
certain other equipment that previously had been temporarily stored included in
Special charges.



 



 






 



Revenues
2008 Compared to
2007    The Company’s revenues increased approximately
$831 million, or 3.6 percent, to $23.8 billion in 2008 compared to 2007.
American’s passenger revenues increased by 3.3 percent, or $583 million, despite
a significant capacity (available seat mile) (ASM) decrease of 3.8
percent.  American’s passenger load factor decreased approximately one
point to 80.6 percent and passenger revenue yield per passenger mile increased
8.6 percent to 13.84 cents.  This resulted in an increase in passenger
revenue per available seat mile (RASM) of 7.3 percent to 11.15 cents. In 2008,
American derived approximately 60 percent of its passenger revenues from
domestic operations and approximately 40 percent from international
operations.  Certain 2007 passenger revenues were reclassified to
conform with the current presentation, as described in Note 1 to the
consolidated financial statements.  Following is additional
information regarding American’s domestic and international RASM and
capacity:




 
      
 



Year
      Ended December 31, 2008

 


 
      
 

RASM
(cents)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 
 

ASMs
      (billions)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



DOT
      Domestic

 
 
10.81
 
 
 
5.5
%
 
 
101.9
 
 
 
(6.1
)%



International

 
 
11.71
 
 
 
10.1
 
 
 
61.7
 
 
 
0.5
 



   DOT
      Latin America

 
 
12.47
 
 
 
11.9
 
 
 
30.4
 
 
 
2.2
 



   DOT
      Atlantic

 
 
10.96
 
 
 
6.6
 
 
 
24.6
 
 
 
(1.4
)



   DOT
      Pacific

 
 
11.04
 
 
 
13.2
 
 
 
6.7
 
 
 
(0.4
)





Regional
Affiliates’ passenger revenues, which are based on industry standard proration
agreements for flights connecting to American flights, remained flat at $2.5
billion.  Regional Affiliates’ traffic decreased 10.2 percent to 8.8
billion revenue passenger miles (RPMs), while capacity decreased 6.0 percent to
12.6 billion ASMs, resulting in a 3.2 point decrease in passenger load factor to
70.2 percent.

Cargo
revenues increased 5.9 percent, or $49 million, primarily as a result of increased
fuel surcharges.

Other
revenues increased 9.2 percent, or $183 million, to $2.2 billion due to
increases in certain passenger service charges.



 



 






 



2007 Compared to
2006    The Company’s revenues increased approximately
$372 million, or 1.6 percent, to $22.9 billion in 2007 compared to 2006.
American’s passenger revenues increased by 2.1 percent, or $360 million, despite
a capacity (available seat mile) (ASM) decrease of 2.4
percent.  American’s passenger load factor increased 1.4 points to
81.5 percent and passenger revenue yield per passenger mile increased 2.8
percent to 12.75 cents.  This resulted in an increase in passenger
revenue per available seat mile (RASM) of 4.6 percent to 10.39 cents. In 2007,
American derived approximately 63 percent of its passenger revenues from
domestic operations and approximately 37 percent from international operations.
Certain 2007 and 2006 passenger revenues were reclassified to conform with the
current presentation, as described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements.  Following is additional information regarding American’s
domestic and international RASM and capacity:




 
      
 



Year
      Ended December 31, 2007

 


 
      
 

RASM
(cents)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 
 

ASMs
      (billions)

 
 

Y-O-Y
Change

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



DOT
      Domestic

 
 
10.3
 
 
 
3.4
%
 
 
108.5
 
 
 
(2.6
)%



International

 
 
10.6
 
 
 
6.6
 
 
 
61.4
 
 
 
(2.0
)



   DOT
      Latin America

 
 
11.1
 
 
 
6.7
 
 
 
29.6
 
 
 
0.9
 



   DOT
      Atlantic

 
 
10.3
 
 
 
2.7
 
 
 
25.0
 
 
 
(0.5
)



   DOT
      Pacific

 
 
9.8
 
 
 
18.6
 
 
 
6.8
 
 
 
(17.1
)





Regional
Affiliates’ passenger revenues, which are based on industry standard proration
agreements for flights connecting to American flights, decreased $32 million, or
1.3 percent, to $2.5 billion as a result of decreased capacity and load
factors.  Regional Affiliates’ traffic decreased 1.2 percent to 9.8
billion revenue passenger miles (RPMs), while capacity decreased 1.0 percent to
13.4 billion ASMs, resulting in a 0.2 point decrease in passenger load factor to
73.4 percent.

Cargo
revenues decreased 0.2 percent, or $2 million primarily as a result of lower
freight traffic.

Other
revenues increased 2.4 percent, or $46 million, to $1.9 billion due in part to
increases in certain passenger service charges and higher passenger
volumes.


 



 






 



Operating
Expenses
2008 Compared to
2007 The Company’s total operating expenses increased 16.8 percent, or
$3.7 billion, to $25.7 billion in 2008 compared to 2007.  American’s
mainline operating expenses per ASM in 2008 increased 21.9 percent compared to
2007 to 13.87 cents. The increase in operating expense was largely due to a
dramatic year-over-year increase in fuel prices from $2.13 per gallon in 2007 to
$3.03 per gallon in 2008, including the impact of fuel hedging.  Fuel
expense was the Company’s largest single expense category and the price increase
resulted in $2.7 billion in incremental year-over-year fuel expense in 2008
(based on the year-over-year increase in the average price per gallon multiplied
by gallons consumed, inclusive of the impact of fuel hedging).  A
return to the recent historically high fuel prices and/or disruptions in the
supply of fuel would further materially adversely affect the Company’s financial
condition and results of operations.  The remaining increase in
operating expense was due to the second quarter 2008 impairment charge of $1.1
billion to write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and Embraer RJ-135 fleets and
certain related long-lived assets down to their estimated fair values and
certain other special charges and employee charges, as discussed previously in
Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations”.










(in
      millions)
 
Operating
      Expenses

 

Year
      ended December 31, 2008

 
 



Change
      from 2007

 
 



Percentage
      Change

 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



Aircraft
      fuel

 
$
9,014
 
 
$
2,344
 
 
 
35.1
%

 
      (a)




Wages,
      salaries and benefits

 
 
6,655
 
 
 
(115
)
 
 
(1.7
)
 
      



Other
      rentals and landing fees

 
 
1,298
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
1.6
 
 
      



Depreciation
      and amortization

 
 
1,207
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
0.4
 
 
      



Maintenance,
      materials and repairs

 
 
1,237
 
 
 
180
 
 
 
17.0
 

 
      (b)




Commissions,
      booking fees and credit card expense

 
 
 997
 
 
 
(31
)
 
 
(3.0
)
 
      



Aircraft
      rentals

 
 
492
 
 
 
(99
)
 
 
(16.8
)

 
      (c)




Food
      service

 
 
518
 
 
 
(16
)
 
 
(3.0
)
 
      



Special
      charges

 
 
1,213
 
 
 
1,150
 
 
 
*
 

 
      (d)




Other
      operating expenses

 
 
3,024
 
 
 
247
 
 
 
8.9
 

 
      (e)




Total
      operating expenses

 
$
25,655
 
 
$
3,685
 
 
 
16.8
%
 
      








        * Not
meaningful




(a)  


Aircraft
      fuel expense increased primarily due to a 42.4 percent increase in the
      Company’s price per gallon of fuel (net of the impact of hedging gains of
      $380 million) offset by a 5.1 percent decrease in the Company’s fuel
      consumption, primarily due to reductions in available seat
      miles.








(b)  


Maintenance,
      materials and repairs expense increased due to a heavier workscope of
      scheduled and unscheduled airframe maintenance overhauls, dependability
      initiatives, repair costs and volume, and contractual engine repair rates,
      which are driven by aircraft age.








(c)  


Aircraft
      rental expense decreased principally due to lease expirations of Boeing
      757 and McDonnell Douglas MD-80
aircraft.








(d)  


Special
      charges are related to an impairment charge in the second quarter of 2008
      of $1.1 billion to write down the Company’s McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and
      Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related long-lived assets to their
      estimated fair values. This impairment charge was triggered by the record
      increase in fuel prices over the preceding twelve months.  In
      addition, the Company accrued $71 million for severance costs and $33
      million related to the grounding of leased Airbus A300 aircraft prior to
      lease expiration, both related to the capacity
  reductions.








(e)  


Other
      operating expenses increased due in part to an increase in foreign
      exchange losses of $70 million.





 


 



 






 



2007 Compared to
2006   The
Company’s total operating expenses increased 2.2 percent, or $467 million, to
$22.0 billion in 2007 compared to 2006.  American’s mainline operating
expenses per ASM in 2007 increased 4.4 percent compared to 2006 to 11.38 cents.
This increase in operating expenses per ASM is due primarily to a 5.6 percent
increase in American’s price per gallon of fuel (net of the impact of fuel
hedging) in 2007 relative to 2006.









(in
      millions)
 
Operating
      Expenses

 

Year
      ended December 31, 2007

 
 



Change
      from 2006

 
 



Percentage
      Change

 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



Wages,
      salaries and benefits

 
$
6,770
 
 
$
(43
)
 
 
(0.6
)%
 
      



Aircraft
      fuel

 
 
6,670
 
 
 
268
 
 
 
4.2
 

 
      (a)




Other
      rentals and landing fees

 
 
1,278
 
 
 
(5
)
 
 
(0.4
)
 
      



Depreciation
      and amortization

 
 
1,202
 
 
 
45
 
 
 
3.9
 
 
      



Maintenance,
      materials and repairs

 
 
1,057
 
 
 
86
 
 
 
8.9
 

 
      (b)




Commissions,
      booking fees and credit card expense

 
 
1,028
 
 
 
(47
)
 
 
(4.5
)
 
      



Aircraft
      rentals

 
 
591
 
 
 
(15
)
 
 
(2.5
)
 
      



Food
      service

 
 
534
 
 
 
26
 
 
 
5.1
 
 
      



Special
      charges

 
 
63
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
*
 

 
      (c)




Other
      operating expenses

 
 
2,777
 
 
 
89
 
 
 
3.2
 
 
      



Total
      operating expenses

 
$
21,970
 
 
$
467
 
 
 
2.2
%
 
      







       
* Not
meaningful
 




(a)  


Aircraft
      fuel expense increased primarily due to a 5.6 percent increase in
      American’s price per gallon of fuel (net of the impact of hedging gains of
      $239 million) offset by a 1.6 percent decrease in American’s fuel
      consumption.








(b)  


Maintenance,
      materials and repairs expense increased primarily due to $57 million in
      heavier workscope of scheduled airframe maintenance overhauls, repair
      costs and volume, and contractual engine repair rates, which are driven by
      aircraft age.








(c)  


Special
      charges increased due to a $63 million charge for the retirement of 24
      MD-80 aircraft and certain related
equipment.





Other
Income (Expense)
Other
income (expense) consists of interest income and expense, interest capitalized
and miscellaneous - net.

2008 Compared to
2007 Decreases in both short-term investment balances and interest rates
caused a decrease in Interest income of $156 million, or 46.4 percent, to $181
million.  Interest expense decreased $158 million, or 17.2 percent, to
$756 million primarily as a result of a decrease in the Company’s long-term debt
balance.  Miscellaneous – net includes a gain of $432 million for the
sale of American Beacon.

2007 Compared to
2006 Increases in both short-term investment balances and interest rates
caused an increase in Interest income of $58 million, or 20.8 percent, to $337
million.  Interest expense decreased $116 million, or 11.2 percent, to
$914 million primarily as a result of prepayment and repayment of existing
debt.  Miscellaneous – net includes a gain of $138 million for the
sale of ARINC.
 
Income Tax Benefit




The
Company did not record a net tax provision or benefit associated with its 2008
losses or its 2007 or 2006 earnings due to the Company providing a valuation
allowance, as discussed in Note 8 to the consolidated financial
statements.




















Operating
Statistics
The
following table provides statistical information for American and Regional
Affiliates for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006.





 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



American
      Airlines, Inc. Mainline Jet Operations

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Revenue
      passenger miles (millions)

 
 
131,757
 
 
 
138,453
 
 
 
139,454
 



Available
      seat miles (millions)

 
 
163,532
 
 
 
169,906
 
 
 
174,021
 



Cargo
      ton miles (millions)

 
 
2,005
 
 
 
2,122
 
 
 
2,224
 



Passenger
      load factor

 
 
80.6
%
 
 
81.5
%
 
 
80.1
%



Passenger
      revenue yield per passenger mile (cents) (^)

 
 
13.84
 
 
 
12.75
 
 
 
12.40
 



Passenger
      revenue per available seat mile (cents) (^)

 
 
11.15
 
 
 
10.39
 
 
 
9.94
 



Cargo
      revenue yield per ton mile (cents)

 
 
43.59
 
 
 
38.86
 
 
 
37.18
 



Operating
      expenses per available seat mile, excluding Regional Affiliates
      (cents) (*)

 
 
 13.87
 
 
 
 11.38
 
 
 
10.90
 



Fuel
      consumption (gallons, in millions)

 
 
2,694
 
 
 
2,834
 
 
 
2,881
 



Fuel
      price per gallon (cents)

 
 
302.6
 
 
 
212.1
 
 
 
200.8
 



Operating
      aircraft at year-end

 
 
626
 
 
 
655
 
 
 
697
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Regional
      Affiliates

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Revenue
      passenger miles (millions)

 
 
8,846
 
 
 
9,848
 
 
 
9,972
 



Available
      seat miles (millions)

 
 
12,603
 
 
 
13,414
 
 
 
13,554
 



Passenger
      load factor

 
 
70.2
%
 
 
73.4
%
 
 
73.6
%










(*)  Excludes
      $3.1 billion, $2.8 billion and $2.7 billion of expense incurred related to
      Regional Affiliates in 2008, 2007
and










2006,
      respectively.





(^) Reflects the impact of the
reclassification of certain 2007 and 2006 passenger revenues to conform with the
current presentation, as described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial
statements.  





 
      


Outlook





The
Company currently expects capacity for American’s mainline jet operations to
decline by 8.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 versus first quarter
2008.  American’s mainline capacity for the full year 2009 is expected to
decrease approximately 6.5 percent from 2008 with a 9.0 percent reduction in
domestic capacity and more than a 2.5 percent decrease in international
capacity. 

The
Company currently expects first quarter 2009 mainline unit costs to decrease
approximately 2.9 percent year over year.  The first quarter 2009 and
full year 2009 unit cost expectations reflect the reduction in the cost of fuel
during the last quarter of 2008, somewhat offset by increased defined benefit
pension expenses and retiree medical and other expenses (due to the stock market
decline), and by cost pressures associated with the Company’s previously
announced capacity reductions and dependability initiatives.  Due to
these cost pressures, the Company expects first quarter and full year 2009 unit
costs excluding fuel to be higher than the respective prior year
periods.  The Company’s results are significantly affected by the
price of jet fuel, which is in turn affected by a number of factors beyond the
Company’s control.  Although fuel prices have abated somewhat from the
record prices recorded in July 2008, fuel prices are still very
volatile.

The
Company is experiencing significantly weaker
demand for air travel driven by the severe downturn in the global
economy.  The Company implemented capacity reductions in 2008 in
response to record high fuel prices which have somewhat mitigated this weakening
of demand, and has now announced further reductions to the 2009 capacity
plan.  However, if the global economic downturn persists or worsens,
demand for air travel may continue to weaken.  No assurance can be
given that capacity reductions or other steps we may take will be adequate to
offset the effects of reduced demand.



 



 






 



Other
Information

Critical Accounting Policies and
Estimates   The preparation of the Company’s financial
statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in
the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.  The
Company believes its estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, actual
results and the timing of the recognition of such amounts could differ from
those estimates.  The Company has identified the following critical
accounting policies and estimates used by management in the preparation of the
Company’s financial statements: accounting for fair value, long-lived assets,
routes, passenger revenue, frequent flyer program, stock compensation, pensions
and retiree medical and other benefits, income taxes and derivatives
accounting.

Fair value
– The Company has adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157
“Fair Value Measurements” (SFAS 157) as it applies to financial assets and
liabilities effective January 1, 2008.  The Company's routes are
not yet subject to SFAS 157. SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a
framework for measuring fair value under generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP) and enhances disclosures about fair value measurements. Fair
value is defined under SFAS 157 as the exchange price that would be received for
an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or
most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants on the measurement date.   For
additional information on the fair value of certain financial assets and
liabilities, see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.

Under
SFAS 157, AMR utilizes several valuation techniques in order to assess the fair
value of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities.  The
Company’s fuel derivative contracts, which primarily consist of commodity
options and collars, are valued using energy and commodity market data which is
derived by combining raw inputs with quantitative models and processes to
generate forward curves and volatilities.  The Company’s short-term
investments primarily utilize broker quotes in a non-active market for valuation
of these securities.

Long-lived
assets – The Company has approximately $17 billion of long-lived assets
as of December 31, 2008, including approximately $16 billion related to flight
equipment and other fixed assets.  In addition to the original cost of
these assets, the recorded value of the Company’s fixed assets is impacted by a
number of estimates made by the Company, including estimated useful lives,
salvage values and the Company’s determination as to whether aircraft are
temporarily or permanently grounded.  In accordance with Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting for the Impairment or
Disposal of Long-Lived Assets” (SFAS 144), the Company records impairment
charges on long-lived assets used in operations when events and circumstances
indicate that the assets may be impaired, the undiscounted cash flows estimated
to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amount of those
assets and the net book value of the assets exceeds their estimated fair value.
In making these determinations, the Company uses certain assumptions, including,
but not limited to: (i) estimated fair value of the assets; and (ii) estimated
future cash flows expected to be generated by the assets, generally evaluated at
a fleet level, which are based on additional assumptions such as asset
utilization, length of service and estimated salvage values. A change in the
Company's fleet plan has been the primary indicator that has resulted in an
impairment charge in the past.

The
majority of American’s fleet types are depreciated over 30 years.  It
is possible that the ultimate lives of the Company’s aircraft will be
significantly different than the current estimate due to unforeseen events in
the future that impact the Company’s fleet plan, including positive or negative
developments in the areas described above.  For example, operating the
aircraft for a longer period will result in higher maintenance, fuel and other
operating costs than if the Company replaced the aircraft.  At some
point in the future, higher operating costs, including higher fuel expense,
and/or improvement in the Company’s economic condition, could change the
Company’s analysis of the impact of retaining aircraft versus replacing them
with new aircraft.

In the
second quarter of 2008, in connection with the May 21, 2008 announcement
regarding capacity reductions and related matters, the Company concluded a
triggering event had occurred and required that fixed assets be tested for
impairment.  As a result of that testing, the Company recorded
impairment charges related to its McDonnell Douglas MD-80 aircraft and Embraer
RJ-135 aircraft.  With respect to all other fleets, the gross cash
flows of the remaining estimated useful lives exceeded the recorded value and no
impairment was necessary.  See Note 2 to the consolidated financial
statements for additional information with respect to these impairment
charges.
 

















In the
fourth quarter of 2007, the Company permanently grounded and held for disposal
24 McDonnell Douglas MD-80 airframes and certain other equipment, all 24 of
which had previously been in temporary storage. See further discussion in Note 2
to the consolidated financial statements.
 
Routes -- AMR performs annual
impairment tests on its routes, which are indefinite life intangible assets
under Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142 "Goodwill and Other
Intangibles" and as a result they are not amortized. The Company also performs
impairment tests when events and circumstances indicate that the assets might be
impaired.  These tests are primarily based on estimates of discounted
future cash flows, using assumptions based on historical results adjusted to
reflect the Company’s best estimate of future market and operating
conditions.   The net carrying value of assets not recoverable is
reduced to fair value. The Company's estimates of fair value represent its best
estimate based on industry trends and reference to market rates and
transactions.

The   Company   had   recorded  route  acquisition  costs   (including
international routes and slots) of $828 million as of December
31,  2008,
including  a  significant  amount  related  to  operations  at  London
Heathrow.  The Company has completed an impairment analysis on the
London Heathrow routes (including slots) and has concluded that no impairment
exists.   The Company believes its estimates and assumptions are
reasonable; however, given the significant uncertainty regarding how the recent
open skies agreement will ultimately affect the Company’s operations at
Heathrow, the actual results could differ from those estimates.  See
Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.





 
      


Passenger
      revenue –
      Passenger ticket sales are initially recorded as a component of Air
      traffic liability.  Revenue derived from ticket sales is
      recognized at the time service is provided.  However, due to
      various factors, including the industry’s pricing structure and interline
      agreements throughout the industry, certain amounts are recognized in
      revenue using estimates regarding both the timing of the revenue
      recognition and the amount of revenue to be recognized, including
      breakage. These estimates are generally based upon the evaluation of
      historical trends, including the use of regression analysis and other
      methods to model the outcome of future events based on the Company’s
      historical experience, and are recognized at the scheduled time of
      departure. The Company’s estimation techniques have been applied
      consistently from year to year.  However, due to changes in the
      Company’s ticket refund policy and changes in the travel profile of
      customers, historical trends may not be representative of future
      results.





Frequent flyer
program –
American uses the incremental cost method to account for the portion of its
frequent flyer liability incurred when AAdvantage members earn mileage credits
by flying on American or its regional affiliates.

The
Company considers breakage in its incremental cost calculation and recognizes
breakage on AAdvantage miles sold over the estimated period of usage for sold
miles that are ultimately redeemed.  The Company calculates its
breakage estimate using separate breakage rates for miles earned by flying on
American and miles earned through other companies who have purchased AAdvantage
miles for distribution to their customers, due to differing behavior
patterns.

Management
considers historical patterns of account breakage to be a useful indicator when
estimating future breakage. Future program redemption opportunities can
significantly alter customer behavior from historical patterns with respect to
inactive accounts. Such changes may result in material changes to the deferred
revenue balance, as well as recognized revenues from the program.

American
includes fuel, food, passenger insurance and reservations/ticketing costs in the
calculation of incremental cost.  These estimates are generally
updated based upon the Company’s 12-month historical average of such
costs.  American also accrues a frequent flyer liability for the
mileage credits expected to be used for travel on participating airlines based
on historical usage patterns and contractual rates.

Revenue
earned from selling AAdvantage miles to other companies is recognized in two
components.  The first component represents the revenue for air
transportation sold and is valued at fair value.  This revenue is
deferred and recognized over the period the mileage is expected to be used,
which is currently estimated to be 28 months.  The second revenue
component, representing the marketing services sold, is recognized as related
services are provided.



 



 






 



The
Company’s total liability for future AAdvantage award redemptions for free,
discounted or upgraded travel on American, American Eagle or participating
airlines as well as unrecognized revenue from selling AAdvantage miles to other
companies was approximately $1.7 billion and $1.6 billion at December 31, 2008
and 2007, respectively (and is recorded as a component of Air traffic liability
in the consolidated balance sheets), representing 18.2 percent and 18.7 percent
of AMR's total current liabilities, at December 31, 2008 and 2007,
respectively.

The
number of free travel awards used for travel on American and American Eagle was
3.1 million in 2008 and 2.6 million in 2007 representing approximately 9.7 and
7.5 percent of passengers boarded in each year, respectively. The Company
believes displacement of revenue passengers is minimal given the Company’s load
factors, its ability to manage frequent flyer seat inventory, and the relatively
low ratio of free award usage to total passengers boarded.

Changes
to the percentage of the amount of revenue deferred, deferred recognition
period, percentage of awards expected to be redeemed for travel on participating
airlines, breakage or cost per mile estimates could have a significant impact on
the Company’s revenues or incremental cost accrual in the year of the change as
well as in future years.

Stock
Compensation – AMR accounts for
its stock compensation under the fair value recognition provisions of Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123(R) "Share-Based Payment". The Company
grants awards under its various share based payment plans and utilizes option
pricing models or fair value models to estimate the fair value of its
awards.  Certain awards contain a market performance condition, which
is taken into account in estimating the fair value on the date of grant.
 The fair value of those awards is calculated by multiplying the stock
price on the date of grant by the expected payout percentage and the number of
shares granted.  The Company accounts for these awards over the three
year term of the award based on the grant date fair value, provided adequate
shares are available to settle the awards.  For awards where adequate
shares are not anticipated to be available or that only permit settlement in
cash, the fair value is re-measured each reporting period.  

Pensions and
retiree medical and other benefits – The Company accounts
for its pension and retiree medical and other benefits
under  Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 158 “Employers’
Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans” (SFAS
158).  SFAS 158 requires the Company to recognize the funded status
(i.e., the difference between the fair value of plan assets and the projected
benefit obligations) of its pension and postretirement plans in the consolidated
balance sheet with a corresponding adjustment to Accumulated other comprehensive
income (loss).

The
Company’s pension and other postretirement benefit costs and liabilities are
calculated using various actuarial assumptions and methodologies. The Company
uses certain assumptions including, but not limited to, the selection of the:
(i) discount rate; (ii) expected return on plan assets; and (iii) expected
health care cost trend rate and starting in 2007, the (iv) estimated age of
pilot retirement (as discussed below).

These
assumptions as of December 31 were:





 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Discount
      rate

 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%



Expected
      return on plan assets

 
 
8.75
%
 
 
8.75
%



Expected
      health care cost trend rate:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



     Pre-65
      individuals

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



         Initial

 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%



         Ultimate

 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%



     Post-65
      individuals

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



         Initial

 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%



         Ultimate
      (2010)

 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%



Pilot
      Retirement Age

 
 
63
 
 
 
63
 



 


The
Company’s discount rate is determined based upon the review of year-end high
quality corporate bond rates. Lowering the discount rate by 50 basis points as
of December 31, 2008 would increase the Company’s pension and postretirement
benefits obligations by approximately $643 million and $150 million,
respectively, and increase estimated 2009 pension and postretirement benefits
expense by $66 million and $16 million, respectively.











The
expected return on plan assets is based upon an evaluation of the Company's
historical trends and experience taking into account current and expected market
conditions and the Company’s target asset allocation of 35 percent longer
duration corporate and U.S. government/agency bonds, 25 percent U.S. value
stocks, 20 percent developed international stocks, five percent emerging markets
stocks and bonds and 15 percent alternative (private) investments. The expected
return on plan assets component of the Company’s net periodic benefit cost is
calculated based on the fair value of plan assets and the Company’s target asset
allocation.  The Company monitors its actual asset allocation and
believes that its long-term asset allocation will continue to approximate its
target allocation.  The Company’s historical annualized ten-year rate
of return on plan assets, calculated using a geometric compounding of monthly
returns, is approximately 6.81 percent as of December 31, 2008.  This
rate of return was significantly impacted by market conditions in the latter
half of 2008.  Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on plan
assets by 50 basis points as of December 31, 2008 would increase estimated 2009
pension expense by approximately $32 million.

The
health care cost trend rate is based upon an evaluation of the Company's
historical trends and experience taking into account current and expected market
conditions.  Increasing the assumed health care cost trend rate by 100
basis points would increase estimated 2009 postretirement benefits expense by
$20 million.

In 2007,
the Fair Treatment for Experienced Pilots Act (H.R. 4343) was signed into law,
raising the mandatory retirement age for commercial pilots from 60 to
65.  Previously, The Federal Aviation Administration required
commercial pilots to retire once they reached age 60.  The Company’s
pilot pension and other postretirement plans continue to permit a pilot to
retire as before at age 60, but the Company believes that many pilots will
choose to fly past age 60.  As a result of the new legislation, the
Company has estimated the average retirement age for the pilot workgroup to be
63, based on the approximate retirement age of the Company’s other work groups,
which did not have the same mandatory retirement age.  This change in
the estimate caused a decrease to the pension and other postretirement liability
of approximately $543 million in 2007.  See Note 10 to the
consolidated financial statements for additional information. 

Income
taxes – The
Company generally believes that the positions taken on previously filed income
tax returns are more likely than not to be sustained by the taxing
authorities.  The Company has recorded income tax and related interest
liabilities where the Company believes its position may not be sustained or
where the full income tax benefit will not be recognized.  In
accordance with the standards of Financial Accounting Standards Board
Interpretation No. 48 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
Taxes- an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109” (FIN 48), the
effects of potential income tax benefits resulting from the Company’s
unrecognized tax positions are not reflected in the tax balances of the
financial statements.  Recognized and unrecognized tax positions are
reviewed and adjusted as events occur that affect the Company’s judgment about
the recognizability of income tax benefits, such as lapsing of applicable
statutes of limitations, conclusion of tax audits, release of administrative
guidance, or rendering of a court decision affecting a particular tax
position.  Under SFAS 109, the Company records a deferred tax asset
valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of
its deferred tax assets will not be realized.  The Company considers
its historical earnings, trends, and outlook for future years in making this
determination.  The Company had a deferred tax valuation allowance of
$2.7 billion and $625 million, respectively, at December 31, 2008 and 2007. See
Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for additional
information.

Derivatives – As required by
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative
Instruments and Hedging Activity” (SFAS 133), the Company assesses, both at the
inception of each hedge and on an on-going basis, whether the derivatives that
are used in its hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes
in cash flows of the hedged items.  In doing so, the Company uses a
regression model to determine the correlation of the change in prices of the
commodities used to hedge jet fuel (e.g. NYMEX Heating oil) to the change in the
price of jet fuel.  The Company also monitors the actual dollar offset
of the hedges’ market values as compared to hypothetical jet fuel
hedges.  The fuel hedge contracts are generally deemed to be “highly
effective” if the R-squared is greater than 80 percent and the dollar offset
correlation is within 80 percent to 125 percent.  The Company
discontinues hedge accounting prospectively if it determines that a derivative
is no longer expected to be highly effective as a hedge or if it decides to
discontinue the hedging relationship.  As of December 31 2008, the
Company had derivative contracts in a net liability position at fair value
of $528 million including a liability related to contracts that settled in
December.  A deferred loss of $876 million was recorded in Other
comprehensive income at December 31, 2008, and will be recognized in future
periods as contracts settle.



 



 






 



New
Accounting Pronouncements   

In
May 2008, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) affirmed the
consensus of FASB Staff Position APB 14-1 (FSP APB 14-1), “Accounting for
Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion
(Including Partial Cash Settlement),” which applies to all convertible debt
instruments that have a ‘‘net settlement feature’’, which means that such
convertible debt instruments, by their terms, may be settled either wholly or
partially in cash upon conversion. FSP APB 14-1 requires issuers of
convertible debt instruments that may be settled wholly or partially in cash
upon conversion to separately account for the liability and equity components in
a manner reflective of the issuers’ nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. FSP APB
14-1 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2008, and interim periods within those fiscal
years.  Early adoption is not permitted and retroactive application to
all periods presented is required.  The adoption of FSP APB 14-1 will
affect the historical accounting for the 4.25 percent senior convertible notes
due 2023 (the 4.25 Notes) and the 4.50 percent senior convertible notes due 2024
(the 4.50 Notes), and will result in increased interest expense of approximately
$5 million in 2009, as well as a $47 million, $48 million and $42 million
increase to 2008, 2007 and 2006 interest expense, respectively, upon
retrospective application in the first quarter of 2009.  When the
Company applies this FSP APB 14-1 retroactively in the first quarter of 2009, a
Form 8-K will be filed to reflect the adjustments due to its adoption for 2007
and 2008.  The impact on the balance sheet will not be
significant.




 



 






 



ITEM
7(A).QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK

Market Risk Sensitive
Instruments and Positions

The risk
inherent in the Company’s market risk sensitive instruments and positions is the
potential loss arising from adverse changes in the price of fuel, foreign
currency exchange rates and interest rates as discussed below.  The
sensitivity analyses presented do not consider the effects that such adverse
changes may have on overall economic activity, nor do they consider additional
actions management may take to mitigate the Company’s exposure to such
changes.  Therefore, actual results may differ.  The Company
does not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for accounting policies and
additional information.

Aircraft
Fuel   The Company’s earnings are affected by changes in
the price and availability of aircraft fuel.  In order to provide a
measure of control over price and supply, the Company trades and ships fuel and
maintains fuel storage facilities to support its flight
operations.  The Company also manages the price risk of fuel costs
primarily by using jet fuel and heating oil hedging contracts.  Market
risk is estimated as a hypothetical 10 percent increase in the December 31, 2008
and 2007 cost per gallon of fuel.  Based on projected 2009 fuel usage,
such an increase would result in an increase to aircraft fuel expense of
approximately $399 million in 2009, inclusive of the impact of effective fuel
hedge instruments outstanding at December 31, 2008, and assumes the Company’s
fuel hedging program remains effective under Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging
Activities”.  Comparatively, based on projected 2008 fuel usage, such
an increase would have resulted in an increase to aircraft fuel expense of
approximately $649 million in 2008, inclusive of the impact of fuel hedge
instruments outstanding at December 31, 2007.  The change in market
risk is primarily due to the decrease in fuel prices.  As of January
2009, the Company had cash flow hedges, with collars and options, covering
approximately 35 percent of its estimated 2009 fuel
requirements.  Comparatively, as of December 31, 2007 the Company had
hedged, with collars and options, approximately 24 percent of its estimated 2008
fuel requirements.  The consumption hedged for 2009 by cash flow
hedges is capped at an average price of approximately $2.59 per gallon of jet
fuel, and the Company’s collars have an average floor price of approximately
$1.94 per gallon of jet fuel (both the capped and floor price exclude taxes and
transportation costs).  The Company’s collars represent approximately
32 percent of its estimated 2009 fuel requirements.  A deterioration
of the Company’s financial position could negatively affect the Company’s
ability to hedge fuel in the future.

As of
December 31, 2008, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months it
will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings
approximately $711 million in net incremental expense (based on prices as of
December 31, 2008) related to its fuel derivative hedges, including expenses
from terminated contracts with a bankrupt counterparty and unwound
trades.

Ineffectiveness
is inherent in hedging jet fuel with derivative positions based in crude oil or
other crude oil related commodities.  As required by Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments
and Hedging Activity” (SFAS 133), the Company assesses, both at the inception of
each hedge and on an on-going basis, whether the derivatives that are used in
its hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in cash
flows of the hedged items.  In doing so, the Company uses a regression
model to determine the correlation of the change in prices of the commodities
used to hedge jet fuel (e.g. NYMEX Heating oil) to the change in the price of
jet fuel.  The Company also monitors the actual dollar offset of the
hedges’ market values as compared to hypothetical jet fuel
hedges.  The fuel hedge contracts are generally deemed to be “highly
effective” if the R-squared is greater than 80 percent and the dollar offset
correlation is within 80 percent to 125 percent.  The Company
discontinues hedge accounting prospectively if it determines that a derivative
is no longer expected to be highly effective as a hedge or if it decides to
discontinue the hedging relationship.




 



 






 



Foreign
Currency   The Company is exposed to the effect of foreign
exchange rate fluctuations on the U.S. dollar value of foreign
currency-denominated operating revenues and expenses.  The Company’s
largest exposure comes from the British pound, Euro, Canadian dollar, Japanese
yen and various Latin American currencies. The Company does not currently have a
foreign currency hedge program related to its foreign currency-denominated
ticket sales.  A uniform 10 percent strengthening in the value of the
U.S. dollar from December 31, 2008 and 2007 levels relative to each of the
currencies in which the Company has foreign currency exposure would result in a
decrease in operating income of approximately $146 million and $132 million for
the years ending December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, due to the Company’s
foreign-denominated revenues exceeding its foreign-denominated
expenses.  This sensitivity analysis was prepared based upon projected
2009 and 2008 foreign currency-denominated revenues and expenses as of December
31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.

Interest   The
Company’s earnings are also affected by changes in interest rates due to the
impact those changes have on its interest income from cash and short-term
investments, and its interest expense from variable-rate debt
instruments.  The Company’s largest exposure with respect to
variable-rate debt comes from changes in the London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR). The Company had variable-rate debt instruments representing
approximately 28 percent and 22 percent of its total long-term debt at December
31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.  If the Company’s interest rates
average 10 percent more in 2009 than they did at December 31, 2008, the
Company’s interest expense would increase by approximately $13 million and
interest income from cash and short-term investments would increase by
approximately $7 million.  In comparison, at December 31, 2007, the
Company estimated that if interest rates averaged 10 percent more in 2008 than
they did at December 31, 2007, the Company’s interest expense would have
increased by approximately $14 million and interest income from cash and
short-term investments would have increased by approximately $25
million.  These amounts are determined by considering the impact of
the hypothetical interest rates on the Company’s variable-rate long-term debt
and cash and short-term investment balances at December 31, 2008 and
2007.

Market
risk for fixed-rate long-term debt is estimated as the potential increase in
fair value resulting from a hypothetical 10 percent decrease in interest rates,
and amounts to approximately $297 million and $326 million as of December 31,
2008 and 2007, respectively. The fair values of the Company’s long-term debt
were estimated using quoted market prices or discounted future cash flows based
on the Company’s incremental borrowing rates for similar types of borrowing
arrangements.




 



 






 



ITEM
8.                 CONSOLIDATED
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS







 
      
 

Page

 


 
      
 
 
 



Report
      of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

 
 
51
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Statements of Operations

 
 
52
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Balance Sheets

 
 
53-54
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Statements of Cash Flows

 
 
55
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Consolidated
      Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)

 
 
56
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



Notes
      to Consolidated Financial Statements

 
 
57-85
 








 



 






 



Report
of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 

The Board
of Directors and Stockholders
AMR
Corporation
 
We have
audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of AMR Corporation as of
December 31, 2008 and 2007 and the related consolidated statements of
operations, stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flows for each of the three
years in the period ended December 31, 2008.  Our audits also included
the financial statement schedule listed in the Index at Item
15(a)(2).  These consolidated financial statements and schedule are
the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on these financial statements and schedule based on our
audits.
 
We
conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a
test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and
significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
In our
opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all
material respects, the consolidated financial position of AMR Corporation at
December 31, 2008 and 2007 and the consolidated results of their operations and
their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31,
2008 in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles.  Also, in our opinion, the related financial statement
schedule, when considered in relation to the basic financial statements taken as
a whole, present fairly in all material respects the information set forth
therein.

We also
have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States), AMR Corporation’s internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2008, based on criteria established in
Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 18, 2009
expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
 
 
/s/
Ernst & Young LLP


Dallas,
Texas
February
18, 2009

 


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS








(in
      millions, except per share amounts)

 


 
      
 
 
 


 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



Revenues

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Passenger  -
      American Airlines

 
$
18,234
 
 
$
17,651
 
 
$
17,291
 



    - Regional
      Affiliates

 
 
2,486
 
 
 
2,470
 
 
 
2,502
 



Cargo

 
 
874
 
 
 
825
 
 
 
827
 



Other
      revenues

 
 
2,172
 
 
 
1,989
 
 
 
1,943
 



Total
      operating revenues

 
 
23,766
 
 
 
22,935
 
 
 
22,563
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Expenses

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Aircraft
      fuel

 
 
9,014
 
 
 
6,670
 
 
 
6,402
 



Wages,
      salaries and benefits

 
 
6,655
 
 
 
6,770
 
 
 
6,813
 



Other
      rentals and landing fees

 
 
1,298
 
 
 
1,278
 
 
 
1,283
 



Depreciation
      and amortization

 
 
1,207
 
 
 
1,202
 
 
 
1,157
 



Maintenance,
      materials and repairs

 
 
1,237
 
 
 
1,057
 
 
 
971
 



Commissions,
      booking fees and credit card expense

 
 
997
 
 
 
1,028
 
 
 
1,076
 



Aircraft
      rentals

 
 
492
 
 
 
591
 
 
 
606
 



Food
      service

 
 
518
 
 
 
534
 
 
 
508
 



Special
      charges

 
 
1,213
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
-
 



Other
      operating expenses

 
 
3,024
 
 
 
2,777
 
 
 
2,687
 



Total
      operating expenses

 
 
25,655
 
 
 
21,970
 
 
 
21,503
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      Income (Loss)

 
 
(1,889
)
 
 
965
 
 
 
1,060
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      Income (Expense)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Interest
      income

 
 
181
 
 
 
337
 
 
 
279
 



Interest
      expense

 
 
(756
)
 
 
(914
)
 
 
(1,030
)



Interest
      capitalized

 
 
33
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
29
 



Miscellaneous
      – net

 
 
360
 
 
 
96
 
 
 
(107
)


 
      
 
 
(182
)
 
 
(461
)
 
 
(829
)



 
Income
      (Loss) Before Income Taxes

 
 
(2,071
)
 
 
504
 
 
 
231
 



Income
      tax

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Net
      Earnings (Loss)

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
504
 
 
$
231
 


 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Earnings
      (Loss) Per Share

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Basic

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
2.06
 
 
$
1.13
 



Diluted

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
1.78
 
 
$
0.98
 














The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION




CONSOLIDATED BALANCE
      SHEETS 










(in
      millions, except shares and par value)

 


 
      
 
 
 


 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Assets

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Current
      Assets

 
 
 
 
 
 



Cash

 
$
191
 
 
$
148
 



Short-term
      investments

 
 
2,916
 
 
 
4,387
 



Restricted
      cash and short-term investments

 
 
459
 
 
 
428
 



Receivables,
      less allowance for uncollectible
accounts
      (2008 - $49; 2007 - $41)

 
 
811
 
 
 
1,027
 



Inventories,
      less allowance for obsolescence
(2008
      - $488; 2007 - $424)

 
 
525
 
 
 
601
 



Fuel
      derivative contracts

 
 
188
 
 
 
416
 



Fuel
      derivative collateral deposits

 
 
575
 
 
 
-
 



Other
      current assets

 
 
270
 
 
 
222
 



Total
      current assets

 
 
5,935
 
 
 
7,229
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equipment
      and Property

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Flight
      equipment, at cost

 
 
19,601
 
 
 
23,006
 



Less
      accumulated depreciation

 
 
7,147
 
 
 
9,029
 


 
      
 
 
12,454
 
 
 
13,977
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Purchase
      deposits for flight equipment

 
 
671
 
 
 
241
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      equipment and property, at cost

 
 
5,132
 
 
 
5,238
 



Less
      accumulated depreciation

 
 
2,762
 
 
 
2,825
 


 
      
 
 
2,370
 
 
 
2,413
 


 
      
 
 
15,495
 
 
 
16,631
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equipment
      and Property Under Capital Leases

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Flight
      equipment

 
 
561
 
 
 
1,698
 



Other
      equipment and property

 
 
215
 
 
 
217
 


 
      
 
 
776
 
 
 
1,915
 



Less
      accumulated amortization

 
 
536
 
 
 
1,152
 


 
      
 
 
240
 
 
 
763
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      Assets

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Route
      acquisition costs, slots and airport operating and gate lease rights, less
      accumulated amortization (2008 - $416; 2007 -
$389)

 
 
1,109
 
 
 
1,156
 



Other
      assets

 
 
2,396
 
 
 
2,792
 


 
      
 
 
3,505
 
 
 
3,948
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      Assets

 
$
25,175
 
 
$
28,571
 











The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED
BALANCE SHEETS






(in
      millions, except shares and par value)

 


 
      
 
 
 


 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Liabilities
      and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Current
      Liabilities

 
 
 
 
 
 



Accounts
      payable

 
$
952
 
 
$
1,182
 



Accrued
      salaries and wages

 
 
519
 
 
 
559
 



Fuel
      derivative liability

 
 
716
 
 
 
-
 



Accrued
      liabilities

 
 
1,523
 
 
 
1,708
 



Air
      traffic liability

 
 
3,708
 
 
 
3,985
 



Current
      maturities of long-term debt

 
 
1,849
 
 
 
902
 



Current
      obligations under capital leases

 
 
107
 
 
 
147
 



Total
      current liabilities

 
 
9,374
 
 
 
8,483
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Long-Term
      Debt, Less Current Maturities

 
 
8,419
 
 
 
9,413
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Obligations
      Under Capital Leases,
Less
      Current Obligations

 
 
582
 
 
 
680
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Other
      Liabilities and Credits

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Deferred
      gains

 
 
297
 
 
 
320
 



Pension
      and postretirement benefits

 
 
6,614
 
 
 
3,620
 



Other
      liabilities and deferred credits

 
 
2,824
 
 
 
3,398
 


 
      
 
 
9,735
 
 
 
7,338
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Commitments
      and Contingencies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Stockholders'
      Equity (Deficit)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Preferred
      stock - 20,000,000 shares authorized; None issued

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Common
      stock - $1 par value; 750,000,000 shares authorized;
shares
      issued: 2008 - 284,888,845; 2007 - 255,338,431

 
 
285
 
 
 
255
 



Additional
      paid-in capital

 
 
3,785
 
 
 
3,489
 



Treasury
      shares at cost: 2008 and 2007 - 5,940,399

 
 
(367
)
 
 
(367
)



Accumulated
      other comprehensive income (loss)

 
 
(3,177
)
 
 
670
 



Accumulated
      deficit

 
 
(3,461
)
 
 
(1,390
)


 
      
 
 
(2,935
)
 
 
2,657
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity (Deficit)

 
$
25,175
 
 
$
28,571
 










The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS






(in
      millions)

 


 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



Cash
      Flow from Operating Activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      earnings (loss)

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
504
 
 
$
231
 



Adjustments
      to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided (used) by operating
      activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Depreciation

 
 
1,055
 
 
 
1,036
 
 
 
1,022
 



Amortization

 
 
152
 
 
 
166
 
 
 
135
 



Equity
      based stock compensation

 
 
53
 
 
 
133
 
 
 
142
 



Restructuring
      and settlement charges

 
 
1,317
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
-
 



Gain
      on sale of investments/subsidiaries

 
 
(432
)
 
 
(138
)
 
 
(13
)



Redemption
      payments under operating leases for special facility revenue
      bonds

 
 
(188
)
 
 
(100
)
 
 
(28
)



Change
      in assets and liabilities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Decrease
      (increase) in receivables

 
 
217
 
 
 
(41
)
 
 
3
 



Decrease
      (increase) in inventories

 
 
5
 
 
 
(128
)
 
 
(7
)



Decrease
      (increase) in derivative collateral and unwound derivative
      contracts

 
 
(940
)
 
 
164
 
 
 
 -
 



Increase
      (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued liabilities

 
 
(421
)
 
 
248
 
 
 
(130
)



Increase
      (decrease) in air traffic liability

 
 
(277
)
 
 
203
 
 
 
168
 



Increase
      (decrease) in other liabilities and deferred credits

 
 
178
 
 
 
(135
)
 
 
382
 



Other,
      net

 
 
(42
)
 
 
(40
)
 
 
34
 



     Net
      cash provided by (used in) operating activities

 
 
(1,394
)
 
 
1,935
 
 
 
1,939
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Cash
      Flow from Investing Activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Capital
      expenditures, including purchase deposits on flight
    equipment

 
 
(876
)
 
 
(714
)
 
 
(530
)



Net
      decrease (increase) in short-term investments

 
 
1,471
 
 
 
207
 
 
 
(918
)



Net
      decrease (increase) in restricted cash and short-term
      investments

 
 
(31
)
 
 
40
 
 
 
42
 



Proceeds
      from sale of equipment, property and
    investments/subsidiaries

 
 
480
 
 
 
228
 
 
 
49
 



Other

 
 
11
 
 
 
5
 
 
 
(8
)



     Net
      cash provided by (used in) investing activities

 
 
1,055
 
 
 
(234
)
 
 
(1,365
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Cash
      Flow from Financing Activities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Payments
      on long-term debt and capital lease obligations

 
 
(1,092
)
 
 
(2,321
)
 
 
(1,366
)



Proceeds
      from:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Issuance
      of common stock, net of issuance costs

 
 
294
 
 
 
497
 
 
 
400
 



Reimbursement
      from construction reserve account

 
 
-
 
 
 
59
 
 
 
145
 



Exercise
      of stock options

 
 
1
 
 
 
90
 
 
 
230
 



Issuance
      of long-term debt

 
 
825
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Sale
      leaseback transactions

 
 
354
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



     Net
      cash provided by (used in) financing activities

 
 
382
 
 
 
(1,675
)
 
 
(591
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      increase (decrease) in cash

 
 
43
 
 
 
27
 
 
 
(17
)



Cash
      at beginning of year

 
 
148
 
 
 
121
 
 
 
138
 



Cash
      at end of year

 
$
191
 
 
$
148
 
 
$
121
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 






The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.


 



 





 

   
AMR
CORPORATION





CONSOLIDATED
      STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
(DEFICIT)








(in
      millions, except share amounts)








 
      
 

 
 
Common
Stock

 
 

 
Additional
Paid-in
Capital

 
 

 
 
Treasury
Stock

 
 

Accumulated
      Other Comprehensive Income (loss)

 
 

 
 
Accumulated
      Deficit

 
 

 
 
 
Total

 



Balance
      at January 1, 2006

 
$
195
 
 
$
2,258
 
 
$
(779
)
 
$
(979
)
 
$
(2,125
)
 
$
(1,430
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      earnings

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
231
 
 
 
231
 



Pension,
      retiree medical and other liability

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
748
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
748
 



Net
      changes in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(62
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(62
)



Total
      comprehensive income

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
917
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reclassification
      and amortization of stock compensation plans

 
 
-
 
 
 
275
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
275
 



Issuance
      of 15,002,091 shares

 
 
15
 
 
 
385
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
400
 



Issuance
      of 24,489,980 shares to employees pursuant to stock option and deferred
      stock incentive plans

 
 
  18
 
 
 
(200
)
 
 
  412
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  230
 



Adjustment
      resulting from adoption of SFAS 158

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(998
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(998
)



Balance
      at December 31, 2006

 
 
228
 
 
 
2,718
 
 
 
(367
)
 
 
(1,291
)
 
 
(1,894
)
 
 
(606
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      earnings

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
504
 
 
 
504
 



Pension,
      retiree medical and other liability

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1,744
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 1,744
 



Net
      changes in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 223
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 223
 



Unrealized
      loss on investments

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(6
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(6
)



           Total
      comprehensive income

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2,465
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reclassification
      and amortization of stock compensation plans

 
 
-
 
 
 
211
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
211
 



Issuance
      of 13,000,000 shares

 
 
13
 
 
 
484
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
497
 



Issuance
      of 14,173,610 shares to employees pursuant to stock option and deferred
      stock incentive plans

 
 
   14
 
 
 
   76
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   90
 



Balance
      at December 31, 2007

 
 
255
 
 
 
3,489
 
 
 
(367
)
 
 
670
 
 
 
(1,390
)
 
 
2,657
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      loss

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(2,071
)
 
 
(2,071
)



Pension,
      retiree medical and other liability

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(2,724
)
 
 
 -
 
 
 
(2,724
)



Net
      changes in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(1,116
)
 
 
 -
 
 
 
(1,116
)



Unrealized
      loss on investments

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(7
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(7
)



           Total
      comprehensive loss

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5,918
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reclassification
      and amortization of stock compensation plans

 
 
-
 
 
 
30
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
30
 



Issuance
      of 27,057,554 shares

 
 
27
 
 
 
267
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
294
 



Issuance
      of 2,492,860 shares to employees pursuant to stock option and deferred
      stock incentive plans

 
 
   3
 
 
 
(1
)
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
   2
 



Balance
      at December 31, 2008

 
$
285
 
 
$
3,785
 
 
$
(367
)
 
$
(3,177
)
 
$
(3,461
)
 
$
(2,935
)




 
The
accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial
statements.



 



 






 






NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS   
1.         Summary of Accounting
Policies

Basis of
Presentation   The accompanying
consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2008 and for the three
years ended December 31, 2008 include the accounts of AMR Corporation (AMR or
the Company) and its wholly owned subsidiaries, including (i) its principal
subsidiary American Airlines, Inc. (American) and (ii) its regional airline
subsidiary, AMR Eagle Holding Corporation and its primary subsidiaries, American
Eagle Airlines, Inc. and Executive Airlines, Inc. (collectively, AMR
Eagle).  The consolidated financial statements as of and for the years
ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 include the accounts of the Company and
its wholly owned subsidiaries as well as variable interest entities for which
the Company is the primary beneficiary.  All significant intercompany
transactions have been eliminated.

New Accounting
Pronouncements   The Company has adopted Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 “Fair Value Measurements” (SFAS 157) as
it applies to financial assets and liabilities effective January 1,
2008.  The Company's routes are not yet subject to SFAS 157. SFAS 157
defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value under
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and enhances disclosures about
fair value measurements. Fair value is defined under SFAS 157 as the exchange
price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an
exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the
measurement date.  The principal impact to the Company was to require
the Company to expand its disclosure regarding its derivative instruments and to
consider credit risk as a part of the calculation of the fair value of
derivatives, which was not significant after consideration of
collateral.

In March
of 2008, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 161,
“Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, an amendment
of FASB Statement No. 133” (SFAS 161).  SFAS 161 requires entities to
provide greater transparency about how and why the entity uses derivative
instruments, how the instruments and related hedged items are accounted for
under SFAS 133, and how the instruments and related hedged items affect the
financial position, results of operations, and cash flows of the
entity.  The Company adopted SFAS 161 as of December 31,
2008.  The principal impact to the Company was to require the
expansion of its disclosure regarding its derivative instruments.

In
May 2008, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) affirmed the
consensus of FASB Staff Position APB 14-1 (FSP APB 14-1), “Accounting for
Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion
(Including Partial Cash Settlement),” which applies to all convertible debt
instruments that have a ‘‘net settlement feature’’, which means that such
convertible debt instruments, by their terms, may be settled either wholly or
partially in cash upon conversion. FSP APB 14-1 requires issuers of
convertible debt instruments that may be settled wholly or partially in cash
upon conversion to separately account for the liability and equity components in
a manner reflective of the issuers’ nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. FSP APB
14-1 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning
after December 15, 2008 and interim periods within those fiscal
years.  Early adoption is not permitted and retroactive application to
all periods presented is required.  The adoption of FSP APB 14-1 will
affect the historical accounting for the 4.25 Notes and the 4.50 Notes, and will
result in increased interest expense of approximately $5 million in
2009.  Balance sheet impact is not significant.

Use of
Estimates   The preparation of financial statements in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the
accompanying consolidated financial statements and accompanying
notes.  Actual results could differ from those estimates.

Restricted Cash and Short-term
Investments   The Company has restricted cash and
short-term investments related primarily to collateral held to support projected
workers’ compensation obligations.

Inventories   Spare
parts, materials and supplies relating to flight equipment are carried at
average acquisition cost and are expensed when used in
operations.  Allowances for obsolescence are provided - over the
estimated useful life of the related aircraft and engines - for spare parts
expected to be on hand at the date aircraft are retired from service. Allowances
are also provided for spare parts currently identified as excess and
obsolete.  These allowances are based on management estimates, which
are subject to change.

Maintenance and Repair
Costs   Maintenance and repair costs for owned and leased
flight equipment are charged to operating expense as incurred, except costs
incurred for maintenance and repair under flight hour maintenance contract
agreements, which are accrued based on contractual terms when an obligation
exists.


 








 



1.         Summary of Accounting
Policies (Continued)

Intangible
Assets   Route acquisition costs and airport operating and
gate lease rights represent the purchase price attributable to route authorities
(including international airport take-off and landing slots), domestic airport
take-off and landing slots and airport gate leasehold rights
acquired.  Indefinite-lived intangible assets (route acquisition costs
and international slots and related international take-off and landing slots)
are tested for impairment annually on December 31, rather than amortized, in
accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142, “Goodwill
and Other Intangible Assets” (SFAS 142).  Airport operating and gate
lease rights are being amortized on a straight-line basis over 25 years to a
zero residual value.

Statements of Cash
Flows   Short-term investments, without regard to
remaining maturity at acquisition, are not considered as cash equivalents for
purposes of the statements of cash flows.

Measurement of Asset
Impairments   In accordance with Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of
Long-Lived Assets” (SFAS 144), the Company records impairment charges on
long-lived assets used in operations when events and circumstances indicate that
the assets may be impaired. An asset or group of assets is considered impaired
when the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by the asset is less
than the carrying amount of the asset and the net book value of the asset
exceeds its estimated fair value.  In making these determinations, the
Company uses certain assumptions, including, but not limited to: (i) estimated
fair value of the assets; and (ii) estimated future cash flows expected to be
generated by these assets, which are based on additional assumptions such as
asset utilization, length of service the asset will be used in the Company’s
operations and estimated salvage values.

Equipment and
Property   The provision for depreciation of operating
equipment and property is computed on the straight-line method applied to each
unit of property, except that major rotable parts, avionics and assemblies are
depreciated on a group basis.  The depreciable lives used for the
principal depreciable asset classifications are:



 
      

 
Depreciable
      Life



 
      
 
      



American
      jet aircraft and engines


20
      - 30 years




Other
      regional aircraft and engines


16
      - 20 years




Major
      rotable parts, avionics and assemblies


Life
      of equipment to which applicable




Improvements
      to leased flight equipment


Lesser
      of lease term or expected useful life




Buildings
      and improvements (principally on
leased
      land)


5 -
      30 years or term of lease, including estimated renewal options when
      renewal is economically compelled at key airports




Furniture,
      fixtures and other equipment


3 -
      10 years




Capitalized
      software


3 -
      10 years





Residual
values for aircraft, engines, major rotable parts, avionics and assemblies are
generally five to ten percent, except when guaranteed by a third party for a
different amount.

Equipment
and property under capital leases are amortized over the term of the leases or,
in the case of certain aircraft, over their expected useful
lives.  Lease terms vary but are generally ten to 25 years for
aircraft and seven to 40 years for other leased equipment and
property.

Regional
Affiliates   Revenue from ticket sales is generally
recognized when service is provided. Regional Affiliates revenues for flights
connecting to American flights are based on industry standard proration
agreements.

Passenger
Revenue    Passenger ticket sales
are initially recorded as a component of Air traffic
liability.  Revenue derived from ticket sales is recognized at the
time service is provided.  However, due to various factors, including
the complex pricing structure and interline agreements throughout the industry,
certain amounts are recognized in revenue using estimates regarding both the
timing of the revenue recognition and the amount of revenue to be recognized,
including breakage. These estimates are generally based upon the evaluation of
historical trends, including the use of regression analysis and other methods to
model the outcome of future events based on the Company’s historical experience,
and are recorded at the scheduled time of departure.


 



 






 



1.         Summary of Accounting
Policies (Continued)

Various
taxes and fees assessed on the sale of tickets to end customers are collected by
the Company as an agent and remitted to taxing authorities. These taxes and fees
have been presented on a net basis in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations and recorded as a liability until remitted to the appropriate taxing
authority.

Beginning
in the first quarter of 2008, AMR reclassified revenues associated with the
marketing component of AAdvantage program mileage sales from Passenger revenue
to Other revenue.  As a result of this change, approximately $584
million, $571 million, $557 million, $451 million, $409 million and $387 million
of revenue was reclassified from Passenger revenue to Other revenue for the
years ended December 31, 2007, 2006, 2005, 2004, 2003 and 2002 respectively, to
conform to the current presentation.

Frequent Flyer
Program   The estimated incremental cost of providing free
travel awards is accrued for mileage credits earned by using American’s service
that are expected to be redeemed in the future. American also accrues a frequent
flyer liability for the mileage credits that are expected to be used for travel
on participating airlines based on historical usage patterns and contractual
rates. American sells mileage credits and related services to companies
participating in its frequent flyer program.  The portion of the
revenue related to the sale of mileage credits, representing the revenue for air
transportation sold, is valued at fair value and is deferred and amortized over
28 months, which approximates the expected period over which the mileage credits
are used.  Breakage of sold miles is recognized over the estimated
period of usage.  The remaining portion of the revenue, representing
the marketing services sold and administrative costs associated with operating
the AAdvantage program, is recognized upon sale as a component of other
revenues, as the related services have been provided.  The Company’s
total liability for future AAdvantage award redemptions for free, discounted or
upgraded travel on American, American Eagle or participating airlines as well as
unrecognized revenue from selling AAdvantage miles was approximately $1.7
billion (and is recorded as a component of Air traffic liability on the
accompanying consolidated balance sheets) at December 31, 2008 and $1.6 billion
as of December 31, 2007.

Income
Taxes   The Company generally believes that the positions
taken on previously filed income tax returns are more likely than not to be
sustained by the taxing authorities.  The Company has recorded income
tax and related interest liabilities where the Company believes its position may
not be sustained or where the full income tax benefit will not be
recognized.  In accordance with the standards of Financial Accounting
Standards Board Interpretation No. 48 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
Taxes - an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109” (FIN 48),
the effects of potential income tax benefits resulting from the Company’s
unrecognized tax positions are not reflected in the tax balances of the
financial statements.  Recognized and unrecognized tax positions are
reviewed and adjusted as events occur that affect the Company’s judgment about
the recognizability of income tax benefits, such as lapsing of applicable
statutes of limitations, conclusion of tax audits, release of administrative
guidance, or rendering of a court decision affecting a particular tax
position.

Advertising
Costs   The Company expenses on a straight-line basis the
costs of advertising as incurred throughout the year.  Advertising
expense was $153 million, $162 million and $154 million for the years ended
December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

2.         Special Charges and
Restructuring Activities

As a result of the revenue
environment, high fuel prices and the Company’s restructuring activities,
including its capacity reductions, the Company has recorded a number of charges
during the last few years.  In May 2008, the Company announced
capacity reductions due to unprecedented high fuel costs at that time and the
other challenges facing the industry.  In connection with these
capacity reductions, the Company incurred special charges related to aircraft,
employee reductions and certain other charges.



 



 






 



2.           Special Charges and
Restructuring Activities (Continued)

Aircraft
Charges
In
accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting
for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets” (SFAS 144), the Company
records impairment charges on long-lived assets used in operations when events
and circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired.  Assets or
groups of assets are considered impaired when the undiscounted cash flows
estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the carrying amount of
those assets and the net book value of the assets exceeds their estimated fair
value. In connection with the May 2008 capacity reduction announcement, the
Company concluded that a triggering event had occurred requiring that fixed
assets be tested for impairment.  As a result of this test, the
Company concluded the carrying values of its McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and the
Embraer RJ-135 aircraft fleets were no longer recoverable. Consequently, during
the second quarter of 2008, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $1.1
billion to write these and certain related long-lived assets down to their
estimated fair values. No portion of the impairment charge will result in future
cash expenditures.  All other fleet types were tested for impairment
but were concluded to be recoverable with projected undiscounted cash flows or
these fleet types had fair values at levels above current carrying
value.  Included in the charge for the Embraer RJ-135 fleet were write
downs on 29 aircraft, of which 19 were considered held for sale as of December
31, 2008.  The McDonnell Douglas MD-80 aircraft are being depreciated
over their remaining useful lives averaging approximately five
years.

In
determining the asset recoverability, management estimated the undiscounted
future cash flows utilizing models used by the Company in making fleet and
scheduling decisions.  In determining fair market value, the Company
utilized recent external appraisals of its fleets, a published aircraft pricing
survey and recent transactions involving sales of similar aircraft, adjusted
based on estimates of maintenance status and to consider the impact of recent
industry events on these values.  As a result of the write down of
these aircraft to fair value, as well as the acceleration of the retirement
dates, depreciation expense related to these assets is expected to decrease by
approximately $141 million on an annualized basis.

As part
of these capacity reductions, the Company expects to ground over the next twelve
months its leased Airbus A300 aircraft prior to lease expiration.  As
of December 31, 2008, the Company estimates that it will incur approximately
$130 million in net present value of future lease payments and lease return
costs related to the grounding of the leased A300 fleet, of which $33 million
was incurred in 2008 as four aircraft were removed from service.  The
remaining charges will be incurred over the next three quarters as the aircraft
are removed from service. These expected future charges do not yet consider
potential sublease contracts or similar arrangements with respect to the leased
Airbus 300 aircraft, which could offset a portion of the charges, as significant
contract amendments are required in order to execute any sublease
agreements.  The Company estimates that virtually all of these charges
will result in future cash expenditures.

In the
fourth quarter of 2007, the Company permanently grounded and held for disposal
24 McDonnell Douglas MD-80 airframes and certain other equipment, all of which
had previously been in temporary storage. Of these 24 aircraft, 12 are owned by
the Company, seven are accounted for as capital leases and five are accounted
for as operating leases. Primarily as a result of the retirement, the Company
incurred a charge of $63 million, included in Special
charges expenses in the consolidated statement of operations, to accrue
future lease commitments and write-down the aircraft frames to their fair
values. In determining the fair values of these aircraft, the Company considered
recent transactions involving inventory for the aircraft.

Employee
Charges
In
conjunction with the capacity reductions announced in May 2008, the Company
reduced its workforce commensurate with the announced system-wide capacity
reductions.  This reduction in workforce was accomplished through
various measures, including voluntary programs, part-time work schedules,
furloughs in accordance with collective bargaining agreements, and other
reductions.  As a result of this reduction in workforce, the Company
incurred employee charges of approximately $71 million for severance related
costs in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 112,
“Employers Accounting for Postemployment Benefits” (SFAS 112), based on probable
expectations of involuntary terminations.  The Company
does not expect remaining charges related to the reduction in workforce to be
significant.  



 



 






 



2.           Special Charges and
Restructuring Activities (Continued)

The
following table summarizes the components of the Company’s special charges, the
remaining accruals for these charges and the capacity reduction related charges
(in millions) as of December 31, 2008:









 
      
 

Aircraft
      Charges

 
 

Facility
      Exit Costs

 
 

Employee
      Charges

 
 



Other

 
 



Total

 
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at January 1, 2006

 
 
152
 
 
 
36
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
188
 
 
 
 



Adjustments

 
 
(3
)
 
 
(16
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(19
)
 
 
 



Payments

 
 
(21
)
 
 
(1
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(22
)
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at December 31, 2006

 
$
128
 
 
$
19
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
147
 
 
 
 



Restructuring
      charges

 
 
63
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
63
 
 
 
 



Non-cash
      charges

 
 
(53
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(53
)
 
 
 



Payments

 
 
(12
)
 
 
(1
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(13
)
 
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at December 31, 2007

 
$
126
 
 
$
18
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
144
 
 
 
 
 



Capacity
      reduction charges

 
 
1,117
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
71
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
1,213
 
 
 
 
 



Non-cash
      charges

 
 
(1,103
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(25
)
 
 
(1,128
)
 
 
 
 



Adjustments

 
 
1
 
 
 
(2
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(1
)
 
 
 
 



Payments

 
 
(31
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(55
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(86
)
 
 
 
 



Remaining
      accrual at December 31, 2008

 
$
110
 
 
$
16
 
 
$
16
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
142
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








Cash
outlays related to the accruals for aircraft charges and facility exit costs
will occur through 2017 and 2018, respectively. 

Other
On
September 22, 2001, the Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act
(the Stabilization Act) was signed into law.  The Stabilization Act
provides that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, liability for all
claims, whether compensatory or punitive, arising from the terrorist attacks of
September 11, 2001 (the Terrorist Attacks), against any air carrier shall not
exceed the liability coverage maintained by the air carrier.  Based
upon estimates provided by the Company’s insurance providers, the Company
initially recorded a liability of approximately $2.3 billion for claims arising
from the Terrorist Attacks, after considering the liability protections provided
for by the Stabilization Act.  The balance, recorded in the
accompanying consolidated balance sheet, was $1.7 billion and $1.8 billion at
December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.

In 2008,
the Company finalized the liability associated with flight 587.  A
previously recorded liability and related insurance receivable were reduced as a
result of the settlement by approximately $381 million.

3.         Investments

Short-term
investments consisted of (in millions):





 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Overnight
      investments and time deposits

 
$
1,574
 
 
$
488
 



Corporate
      and bank notes

 
 
1,016
 
 
 
3,781
 



U.
      S. government agency notes

 
 
322
 
 
 
17
 



Other

 
 
4
 
 
 
101
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
2,916
 
 
$
4,387
 







 



 






 



3.         Investments
(Continued)

Short-term
investments at December 31, 2008, by contractual maturity included (in
millions):






Due
      in one year or less

 
$
2,916
 



Due
      between one year and three years

 
 
-
 



Due
      after three years

 
 
-
 


 
      
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
2,916
 





All
short-term investments are classified as available-for-sale and stated at fair
value.  Unrealized gains and losses are reflected as a component of
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).

The
Company has adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 “Fair
Value Measurements” (SFAS 157) as it applies to financial assets and liabilities
effective January 1, 2008.  SFAS 157 defines fair value,
establishes a framework for measuring fair value under generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) and enhances disclosures about fair value
measurements.

SFAS 157
defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or
paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most
advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between
market participants on the measurement date. Under SFAS 157, AMR utilizes
several valuation techniques in order to assess the fair value of the Company’s
financial assets and liabilities.  The Company’s fuel derivative
contracts, which primarily consist of commodity options and collars, are valued
using energy and commodity market data which is derived by combining raw inputs
with quantitative models and processes to generate forward curves and
volatilities.  The Company’s short-term investments primarily utilize
broker quotes in a non-active market for valuation of these
securities.

SFAS 157
also establishes a fair value hierarchy which requires an entity to maximize the
use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when
measuring fair value. The standard describes three levels of inputs that may be
used to measure fair value:

Level 1 - Quoted prices in
active markets for identical assets or liabilities.

Level 2 - Observable inputs
other than Level 1 prices such as quoted prices for similar assets or
liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other inputs that
are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for
substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.  The
Company’s short-term investments primarily utilize broker quotes in a non-active
market for valuation of these securities.  The Company’s fuel
derivative contracts, which primarily consist of commodity options and collars,
are valued using energy and commodity market data which is derived by combining
raw inputs with quantitative models and processes to generate forward curves and
volatilities.

Level 3 - Unobservable inputs
that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to
the fair value of the assets or liabilities.

The
Company utilizes the market approach to measure fair value for its financial
assets and liabilities.  The market approach uses prices and other
relevant information generated by market transactions involving identical or
comparable assets or liabilities.


 



 






 



3.           Investments
(Continued)
 
Assets
and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis are summarized
below:







(in
      millions)

 

Fair Value Measurements as of December 31,
      2008

 



Description

 

Total

 
 

Level
      1

 
 

Level
      2

 
 

Level
      3

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Short
      term investments 1

 
$
2,916
 
 
$
1,411
 
 
$
1,505
 
 
 
-
 



Restricted
      cash and short-term investments 1

 
 
459
 
 
 
453
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
-
 



Fuel
      derivative contracts, net liability 1

 
 
(528
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
(528
)
 
 
-
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total

 
$
2,847
 
 
$
1,864
 
 
$
983
 
 
$
-
 




1
Unrealized gains or losses on short-term investments, restricted cash and
short-term investments and derivatives designated as hedges are recorded in
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) at each measurement
date.

In 2007,
the Company sold its interests in ARINC, Incorporated (ARINC), a military and
aviation communications company, previously recorded as a component of other
assets.  The Company received $192 million in proceeds for its
interest in ARINC, $138 million of which was recognized as a
gain.  The gain on the sale of the Company’s interest in ARINC is
included in Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations. 

4.         Commitments, Contingencies
and Guarantees

During
2008, the Company continued its fleet renewal strategy as it entered into
amendments to its purchase agreement with the Boeing Company.  Giving
effect to the amendments and considering the impact of delays caused by the
recent machinist strike at Boeing, the Company is now committed to take delivery
of a total of 29 737-800 aircraft in 2009, 39 737-800 aircraft in 2010 and eight
737-800 aircraft in 2011.  In addition to these aircraft, the Company
has firm commitments for eleven 737-800 aircraft and seven Boeing 777 aircraft
scheduled to be delivered in 2013 - 2016. Under the Boeing 737-800 and Boeing
777-200 aircraft purchase agreements, payments for the related aircraft purchase
commitments will be approximately $1.0 billion in 2009, $1.1 billion in 2010,
$355 million in 2011, $218 million in 2012, $417 million in 2013 and $584
million for 2014 and beyond. These amounts are net of purchase deposits
currently held by the manufacturer.  Any incremental firm aircraft
orders will increase the Company’s commitments.

American
has granted Boeing a security interest in American’s purchase deposits with
Boeing.  The Company’s purchase deposits totaled $671 million and $239
million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively.

In
October of 2008, the Company entered into a sale leaseback agreement for 20 of
the 76 Boeing 737-800 aircraft to be delivered in 2009 - 2011.  Such
financing is subject to certain terms and conditions including a minimum
liquidity requirement.  In addition, the Company had previously arranged
for backstop financing which covered a significant portion of the remaining 2009
- - 2011 Boeing 737-800 aircraft deliveries. 

On
December 18, 2007, the European Commission issued a Statement of Objection
(“SO”) against 26 airlines, including the Company.  The SO alleges
that these carriers participated in a conspiracy to set surcharges on cargo
shipments in violation of EU law.  The SO states that, in the event
that the allegations in the SO are affirmed, the Commission will impose fines
against the Company.  The Company intends to vigorously contest the
allegations and findings in the SO under EU laws, and it intends to cooperate
fully with all other pending investigations.  Based on the information
to date, the Company has not recorded any reserve for this exposure for the year
ended December 31, 2008.  In the event that the SO is affirmed or
other investigations uncover violations of the U.S. antitrust laws or the
competition laws of some other jurisdiction, or if the Company were named and
found liable in any litigation based on these allegations, such findings and
related legal proceedings could have a material adverse impact on the
Company. 

The
Company has contracts related to facility construction or improvement projects,
primarily at airport locations. The contractual obligations related to these
projects totaled approximately $57 million as of December 31,
2008.  The Company expects to make payments of $45 million and $6
million in 2009 and 2010, respectively.  In addition, the Company has
an information technology support related contract that requires minimum annual
payments of $150 million through 2013.


 



 






 



4.        Commitments,
Contingencies and Guarantees (Continued)

American
has capacity purchase agreements with two regional airlines, Chautauqua
Airlines, Inc. (Chautauqua) and Trans States Airlines, Inc. (collectively the
AmericanConnection® carriers) to provide Embraer EMB-140/145 regional jet
services to certain markets under the brand
“AmericanConnection”.  Under these arrangements, the Company pays the
AmericanConnection® carriers a fee per block hour to operate the
aircraft.  The block hour fees are designed to cover the
AmericanConnection® carriers’ fully allocated costs plus a
margin.  Assumptions for certain costs such as fuel, landing fees,
insurance, and aircraft ownership are trued up to actual values on a pass
through basis. In consideration for these payments, the Company retains all
passenger and other revenues resulting from the operation of the
AmericanConnection® regional jets.  Minimum payments under the
contracts are $68 million in 2009, $120 million over the years 2010 and 2011 and
$17 million in 2012 and 2013.  In addition, if the Company terminates
the Chautauqua contract without cause, Chautauqua has the right to put its 15
Embraer aircraft to the Company.  If this were to happen, the Company
would take possession of the aircraft and become liable for lease obligations
totaling approximately $21 million per year with lease expirations in 2018 and
2019.

The
Company is a party to many routine contracts in which it provides general
indemnities in the normal course of business to third parties for various risks.
The Company is not able to estimate the potential amount of any liability
resulting from the indemnities. These indemnities are discussed in the following
paragraphs.

The
Company’s loan agreements and other London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)-based
financing transactions (including certain leveraged aircraft leases) generally
obligate the Company to reimburse the applicable lender for incremental costs
due to a change in law that imposes (i) any reserve or special deposit
requirement against assets of, deposits with or credit extended by such lender
related to the loan, (ii) any tax, duty or other charge with respect to the loan
(except standard income tax) or (iii) capital adequacy requirements. In
addition, the Company’s loan agreements, derivative contracts and other
financing arrangements typically contain a withholding tax provision that
requires the Company to pay additional amounts to the applicable lender or other
financing party, generally if withholding taxes are imposed on such lender or
other financing party as a result of a change in the applicable tax
law.

These
increased cost and withholding tax provisions continue for the entire term of
the applicable transaction, and there is no limitation on the maximum additional
amounts the Company could be obligated to pay under such
provisions.  Any failure to pay amounts due under such provisions
generally would trigger an event of default and, in a secured financing
transaction, would entitle the lender to foreclose upon the collateral to
realize the amount due.

In
certain transactions, including certain aircraft financing leases and loans and
derivative transactions, the lessors, lenders and/or other parties have rights
to terminate the transaction based on changes in foreign tax law, illegality or
certain other events or circumstances.  In such a case, the Company
may be required to make a lump sum payment to terminate the relevant
transaction.

In its
aircraft financing agreements, the Company generally indemnifies the financing
parties, trustees acting on their behalf and other relevant parties against
liabilities (including certain taxes) resulting from the financing, manufacture,
design, ownership, operation and maintenance of the aircraft regardless of
whether these liabilities  (or taxes) relate to the negligence of the
indemnified parties.

The
Company has general indemnity clauses in many of its airport and other real
estate leases where the Company as lessee indemnifies the lessor (and related
parties) against liabilities related to the Company’s use of the leased
property.  Generally, these indemnifications cover liabilities
resulting from the negligence of the indemnified parties, but not liabilities
resulting from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the indemnified
parties.  In addition, the Company provides environmental indemnities
in many of these leases for contamination related to the Company’s use of the
leased property.

Under
certain contracts with third parties, the Company indemnifies the third party
against legal liability arising out of an action by the third party, or certain
other parties. The terms of these contracts vary and the potential exposure
under these indemnities cannot be determined. Generally, the Company has
liability insurance protecting the Company for the obligations it has undertaken
under these indemnities.



 



 






 



4.         Commitments, Contingencies
and Guarantees (Continued)

AMR and
American have event risk covenants in approximately $1.2 billion of indebtedness
and operating leases as of December 31, 2008.  These covenants permit
the holders of such obligations to receive a higher rate of return (between 100
and 650 basis points above the stated rate) if a designated event, as defined,
should occur and the credit ratings of such obligations are downgraded below
certain levels within a certain period of time.  No designated event,
as defined, had occurred as of December 31, 2008.

The
Company is involved in certain claims and litigation related to its operations.
In the opinion of management, liabilities, if any, arising from these claims and
litigation will not have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated
financial position, results of operations, or cash flows, after consideration of
available insurance.

5.         Leases

AMR's
subsidiaries lease various types of equipment and property, primarily aircraft
and airport facilities.  The future minimum lease payments required
under capital leases, together with the present value of such payments, and
future minimum lease payments required under operating leases that have initial
or remaining non-cancelable lease terms in excess of one year as of December 31,
2008, were (in millions):






 
Year
      Ending December 31,

 

Capital
Leases

 
 

Operating
Leases

 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2009

 
$
182
 
 
$
998
 
 
 
 



2010

 
 
143
 
 
 
932
 
 
 
 



2011

 
 
146
 
 
 
922
 
 
 
 



2012

 
 
97
 
 
 
739
 
 
 
 



2013

 
 
83
 
 
 
652
 
 
 
 



2014
      and thereafter

 
 
476
 
 
 
4,944
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
1,127
 
 
$
9,187
 
 
 
(1
)



Less
      amount representing interest

 
 
438
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Present
      value of net minimum lease payments

 
$
689
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








 
      


 
(1)


 
As
      of December 31, 2008, included in Accrued liabilities and Other
      liabilities and deferred credits on the accompanying consolidated balance
      sheet is approximately $1.1 billion relating to rent expense being
      recorded in advance of future operating lease
  payments.





At
December 31, 2008, the Company was operating 181 jet aircraft and 39 turboprop
aircraft and under operating leases and 76 jet aircraft under capital leases.
The aircraft leases can generally be renewed at rates based on fair market value
at the end of the lease term for one to five years.  Some aircraft
leases have purchase options at or near the end of the lease term at fair market
value, but generally not to exceed a stated percentage of the defined lessor's
cost of the aircraft or a predetermined fixed amount.

During
2008, the Company raised $354 million through sale leasebacks of certain
aircraft, including regional aircraft.  The gain on sale of $92
million is being amortized over the respective remaining lease
terms.  American leases all 39 Super ATR regional aircraft from a
third party (guaranteed by AMR) and in turn, subleases those aircraft to AMR
Eagle for operation.



 



 






 



5.         Leases
(Continued)

Special
facility revenue bonds have been issued by certain municipalities primarily to
improve airport facilities and purchase equipment.  To the extent
these transactions were committed to prior to May 21, 1998 (the effective date
of EITF 97-10, “The Effect of Lessee Involvement in Asset Construction”) they
are accounted for as operating leases under Financial Accounting Standards Board
Interpretation 23, “Leases of Certain Property Owned by a Governmental Unit or
Authority”.  Approximately $1.5 billion of these bonds (with total
future payments of approximately $3.4 billion as of December 31, 2008) are
guaranteed by American, AMR, or both. Approximately $177 million of these
special facility revenue bonds contain mandatory tender provisions that require
American to make operating lease payments sufficient to repurchase the bonds at
various times: $112 million in 2014 and $65 million in 2015. Although American
has the right to remarket the bonds, there can be no assurance that these bonds
will be successfully remarketed. Any payments to redeem or purchase bonds that
are not remarketed would generally reduce existing rent leveling accruals or be
considered prepaid facility rentals and would reduce future operating lease
commitments.  The special facility revenue bonds that contain
mandatory tender provisions are listed in the table above at their ultimate
maturity date rather than their mandatory tender provision date.

Rent
expense, excluding landing fees, was $1.3 billion, $1.4 billion and $1.4 billion
in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

American
has determined that it holds a significant variable interest in, but is not the
primary beneficiary of, certain trusts that are the lessors under 84 of its
aircraft operating leases. These leases contain a fixed price purchase option,
which allows American to purchase the aircraft at a predetermined price on a
specified date. However, American does not guarantee the residual value of the
aircraft.  As of December 31, 2008, future lease payments required
under these leases totaled $1.7 billion.

6.         Indebtedness

Long-term
debt consisted of (in millions):





 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Secured
      variable and fixed rate indebtedness due through 2021
(effective
      rates from 4.25% - 11.36% at December 31, 2008)

 
$
4,783
 
 
$
4,662
 



Enhanced
      equipment trust certificates due through 2012
(rates
      from 3.86% - 12.00% at December 31, 2008)

 
 
2,382
 
 
 
2,482
 



6.0%
      - 8.5% special facility revenue bonds due through 2036

 
 
1,674
 
 
 
1,688
 



Credit
      facility agreement due through 2010
(effective
      rate of 8.60% at December 31, 2008)

 
 
691
 
 
 
440
 



4.25%
      - 4.50% senior convertible notes due 2023 - 2024

 
 
314
 
 
 
619
 



9.0%
      - 10.20% debentures due through 2021

 
 
213
 
 
 
213
 



7.88%
      - 10.55% notes due through 2039

 
 
211
 
 
 
211
 


 
      
 
 
10,268
 
 
 
10,315
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Less
      current maturities

 
 
1,849
 
 
 
902
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Long-term
      debt, less current maturities

 
$
8,419
 
 
$
9,413
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




Maturities
of long-term debt (including sinking fund requirements) for the next five years
are: 2009 - $1.8 billion; 2010 - $1.3 billion; 2011 - $2.2 billion; 2012 - $1.0
billion, 2013 - $700 million.



 



 






 



6.           Indebtedness
(Continued)

American’s
credit facility consists of a fully drawn $255 million senior secured revolving
credit facility (fully drawn in September 2008), and a $436 million term loan
facility (the Revolving Facility and the Term Loan Facility, respectively, and
collectively, the Credit Facility).   Advances under either
facility can be designated, at American’s election, as LIBOR rate advances or
base rate advances. Interest accrues at the LIBOR rate or base rate, as
applicable, plus, in either case, the applicable margin.  The
applicable margin with respect to the Revolving Facility can range from 2.50
percent to 4.00 percent per annum, in the case of LIBOR advances, and from 1.50
percent to 3.00 percent per annum, in the case of base rate advances, depending
upon the senior secured debt rating of the Credit Facility.  Based on
ratings as of December 31, 2008, the applicable margin with respect to the
Revolving Facility is 3.00 percent per annum in the case of LIBOR advances, and
2.00 percent per annum in the case of base rate advances.  The
applicable margin with respect to the Term Loan Facility is 2.00 percent per
annum in the case of LIBOR advances, and 1.00 percent per annum in the case of
base rate advances.

The
Revolving Facility matures on June 17, 2009.  The Term Loan Facility
matures on December 17, 2010 and amortizes quarterly at a rate of $1
million.  Principal amounts repaid under the Term Loan Facility may
not be re-borrowed.

The
Credit Facility is secured by certain aircraft.  The Credit Facility
includes a covenant that requires periodic appraisals of the aircraft at current
market value and requires American to pledge more aircraft or cash collateral if
the loan amount is more than 50 percent of the appraised value (after giving
effect to sublimits for specified categories of aircraft).  In
addition, the Credit Facility is secured by all of American’s existing route
authorities between the United States and Tokyo, Japan, together with certain
slots, gates and facilities that support the operation of such routes.
American’s obligations under the Credit Facility are guaranteed by AMR, and
AMR’s guaranty is secured by a pledge of all the outstanding shares of common
stock of American.
 
The
Credit Facility contains a covenant (the Liquidity Covenant) requiring American
to maintain, as defined, unrestricted cash, unencumbered short-term investments
and amounts available for drawing under committed revolving credit facilities
which have a final maturity of at least 12 months after the date of
determination, of not less than $1.25 billion for each quarterly period through
the remaining life of the Credit Facility. Securities meeting certain rating
criteria and with maturities within 18 months qualify for the Liquidity Covenant
provisions.

The
Credit Facility contains a covenant (the EBITDAR Covenant) requiring AMR to
maintain specified ratios of cash flow to fixed charges.  In May 2008,
AMR and American entered into an amendment to the Credit Facility which waived
compliance with the EBITDAR Covenant for periods ending on any date from and
including June 30, 2008 through March 31, 2009, and which reduced the minimum
ratios AMR is required to satisfy thereafter.  The required ratio will
be 0.90 to 1.00 for the one quarter period ending June 30, 2009 and will
increase to 1.15 to 1.00 for the four quarter period ending September 30,
2010.

AMR and
American were in compliance with the Liquidity Covenant at December 31, 2008 and
expect to be able to comply with this covenant in the
near-term.  Given fuel prices that have been very high by historical
standards and the volatility of fuel prices and revenues, uncertainty in the
capital markets and about other sources of funding, and other factors, it is
difficult to assess whether AMR and American will, in fact, be able to continue
to comply with the Liquidity Covenant and, in particular, the EBITDAR Covenant,
and there are no assurances that they will be able to do so.  Failure
to comply with these covenants would result in a default under the Credit
Facility which – if the Company did not take steps to obtain a waiver of, or
otherwise mitigate, the default – could result in a default under a significant
amount of the Company’s other debt and lease obligations and have a material
adverse impact on the Company.

As of
December 31, 2008, the Company had outstanding $318 million principal amount of
its 4.50 percent senior convertible notes due 2024 (the 4.50
Notes).  On February 17, 2009, virtually all of the holders of the
4.50 Notes exercised their elective put rights and the Company purchased and
retired these notes at a price equal to 100 percent of their principal
amount.  Under the terms of the 4.50 Notes, the Company had the option
to pay the purchase price with cash, stock, or a combination of cash and stock,
and the Company elected to pay for the 4.50 Notes solely with
cash.  The $318 million principal amount of the 4.50 Notes is recorded
as Current maturities of long-term debt as of December 31, 2008.



 



 






 



6.           Indebtedness
(Continued)

In August
2008, AMR retired, by purchasing with cash, $75 million of the $300 million
principal amount of the 4.25 percent senior convertible notes due 2023 (the 4.25
Notes).  In September 2008, the remaining holders of the 4.25 Notes
exercised their elective put rights and the Company purchased and retired these
notes at a price equal to 100 percent of their principal amount, totaling $225
million.  Under the terms of the 4.25 Notes, the Company had the
option to pay the purchase price with cash, stock, or a combination of cash and
stock, and the Company elected to pay for the 4.25 Notes solely with
cash.

Certain
debt is secured by aircraft, engines, equipment and other assets having a net
book value of approximately $10.5 billion as of December 31, 2008.

In 2008,
the Company raised approximately $500 million under a loan secured by
aircraft.  The loan bears interest at a LIBOR-based (London Interbank
Offered Rate) variable rate with a fixed margin which resets quarterly and is
due in installments through 2015.

As of
December 31, 2008, AMR has issued guarantees covering approximately $1.7 billion
of American’s tax-exempt bond debt and American has issued guarantees covering
approximately $745 million of AMR’s unsecured debt.  In addition, as
of December 31, 2008, AMR and American have issued guarantees covering
approximately $305 million of AMR Eagle’s secured debt, and AMR has issued
guarantees covering an additional $2.1 billion of AMR Eagle’s secured
debt.  In 2008, AMR issued guarantees covering $204 million of
American’s leases of 39 Super ATR aircraft, which are subleased to AMR
Eagle.

Cash
payments for interest, net of capitalized interest, were $685 million, $861
million and $944 million for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management

Fuel Price Risk
Management   In March of 2008, the FASB issued Statement
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 161, “Disclosures about Derivative
Instruments and Hedging Activities, an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133”
(SFAS 161).  SFAS 161 requires entities to provide greater
transparency about how and why the entity uses derivative instruments, how the
instruments and related hedged items are accounted for under SFAS 133, and how
the instruments and related hedged items affect the financial position, results
of operations, and cash flows of the entity.  The Company adopted SFAS
161 effective December 31, 2008.

FSP FIN
39-1, “Amendment of FASB Interpretation No. 39,” requires a reporting entity to
elect a policy choice of whether to offset rights to reclaim cash collateral or
obligations to return cash collateral against derivative assets and liabilities
executed with the same counterparty, or present such amounts gross.  The
Company's accounting policy is to present its derivative assets and liabilities
gross including the collateral posted with or by the counterparty.
 

As part
of the Company's risk management program, it uses a variety of financial
instruments, primarily heating oil option and collar contracts, as cash flow
hedges to mitigate commodity price risk.  The Company does not hold or
issue derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.  As of
December 31, 2008, the Company had fuel derivative contracts outstanding
covering 35 million barrels of jet fuel that will be settled over the next 24
months.  A deterioration of the Company’s liquidity position may
negatively affect the Company’s ability to hedge fuel in the
future.



 



 






 



7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management (Continued)

In
accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting
for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activity” (SFAS 133), the Company
assesses, both at the inception of each hedge and on an on-going basis, whether
the derivatives that are used in its hedging transactions are highly effective
in offsetting changes in cash flows of the hedged items.  Derivatives
that meet the requirements of SFAS 133 are granted special hedge accounting
treatment, and the Company’s hedges generally meet these
requirements.  Accordingly, the Company’s fuel derivative contracts
are accounted for as cash flow hedges, and the fair value of the Company’s
hedging contracts is recorded in Current Assets or Current Liabilities in
the accompanying consolidated balance sheets until the underlying jet fuel is
purchased. The Company determines the ineffective portion of its fuel hedge
contracts by comparing the cumulative change in the total value of the fuel
hedge contract, or group of fuel hedge contracts, to the cumulative change in a
hypothetical jet fuel hedge.  If the total cumulative change in value
of the fuel hedge contract more than offsets the total cumulative change in a
hypothetical jet fuel hedge, the difference is considered ineffective and is
immediately recognized as a component of Aircraft fuel
expense.  Effective gains or losses on fuel hedging contracts are
deferred in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized in
earnings as a component of Aircraft fuel expense when the underlying jet fuel
being hedged is used.

Ineffectiveness
is inherent in hedging jet fuel with derivative positions based in crude oil or
other crude oil related commodities.  In assessing effectiveness, the
Company uses a regression model to determine the correlation of the change in
prices of the commodities used to hedge jet fuel (e.g. NYMEX Heating oil) to the
change in the price of jet fuel.  The Company also monitors the actual
dollar offset of the hedges’ market values as compared to hypothetical jet fuel
hedges.  The fuel hedge contracts are generally deemed to be “highly
effective” if the R-squared is greater than 80 percent and dollar offset
correlation is within 80 percent to 125 percent.  The Company
discontinues hedge accounting prospectively if it determines that a derivative
is no longer expected to be highly effective as a hedge or if it decides to
discontinue the hedging relationship.  Subsequently, any changes in
the fair value of these derivatives are marked to market through earnings in the
period of change.

For the
years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company recognized net gains
of approximately $380 million, $239  million and $97 million,
respectively, as a component of fuel expense on the accompanying consolidated
statements of operations related to its fuel hedging agreements, including the
ineffective portion of the hedges.  In addition, in 2006, the Company
recognized a loss of $102 million in Miscellaneous – net for changes in market
value of hedges that did not qualify for hedge accounting during certain periods
in 2006.  The fair value of the Company’s fuel hedging agreements at
December 31, 2008 and 2007, representing the amount the Company would receive
(pay) to terminate the agreements, totaled ($450) million and $353 million,
respectively, which excludes a payable and a receivable, respectively, related
to contracts that settled in December of each year.  As of December
31, 2008, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months it will
reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings approximately
$711 million in net losses (based on prices as of December 31, 2008) related to
its fuel derivative hedges, including losses from terminated contracts with a
bankrupt counterparty and unwound trades.

The
impact of cash flow hedges on the Company’s consolidated financial statements
for the years ending December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, is depicted below
(in millions):






Fair
      Value of Aircraft Fuel Derivative Instruments (all cash flow hedges under
      SFAS 133)
 

 



Asset
      Derivatives as of December 31,

 

Liability
      Derivatives as of December 31,

 



2008

 

2007

 

2008

 

2007

 



Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 

Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 

Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 

Balance
      Sheet Location

 

Fair
      Value

 



Fuel
      derivative contracts

 
$
-
 

Fuel
      derivative contracts

 
$
416
 

Fuel
      derivative liability

 
$
528
 

Accrued
      liabilities

 
$
-
 







 



 






 



7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management (Continued)






Effect
      of Aircraft Fuel Derivative Instruments on Statements of Operations (all
      cash flow hedges under SFAS 133)

 


 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Amount
      of Gain (Loss) Recognized in OCI on Derivative1

 

Location
      of Gain (Loss) Reclassified from Accumulated OCI into Income 1

 

Amount
      of Gain (Loss) Reclassified from Accumulated OCI into Income 1

 

Location
      of Gain (Loss) Recognized in Income on Derivative 2

 

Amount
      of Gain (Loss) Recognized in Income on Derivative 2

 



2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 


$
(738
)
 
$
381
 

Aircraft
      Fuel

 
$
378
 
 
$
165
 

Aircraft
      Fuel

 
$
2
 
 
$
74
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



1 Effective
      portion of gain (loss)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2 Ineffective
      portion of gain (loss)

 
 
 
 
 





The
Company is also exposed to credit losses in the event of non-performance by
counterparties to these financial instruments, and although no assurances can be
given, the Company does not expect any of the counterparties to fail to meet its
obligations.  The credit exposure related to these financial
instruments is represented by the fair value of contracts with a positive fair
value at the reporting date, reduced by the effects of master netting
agreements.  To manage credit risks, the Company selects
counterparties based on credit ratings, limits its exposure to a single
counterparty under defined guidelines, and monitors the market position of the
program and its relative market position with each counterparty. The Company
also maintains industry-standard security agreements with a number of its
counterparties which may require the Company or the counterparty to post
collateral if the value of selected instruments exceed specified mark-to-market
thresholds or upon certain changes in credit ratings.  A deterioration
of the Company’s liquidity position may negatively affect the Company’s ability
to hedge fuel in the future.

Certain
of the Company’s derivative instrument contracts provide that if the Company’s
unrestricted cash balance or credit ratings remain above certain levels, loss
positions on these instruments need not be fully collateralized.  If
the Company’s unrestricted cash balance or credit rating were to fall below
these levels, it would trigger additional collateral to be deposited with the
counterparty up to 100 percent of the loss position of the derivative
contracts.  As of December 31, 2008, the aggregate fair value of all
derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that are in
a net liability position is $528 million, for which the Company had posted
collateral of $575 million.  The Company was over-collateralized as of
December 31, 2008 due to a timing lag in collateral reconciliation of $92
million by a certain counterparty.  Excluding the impact of this
timing lag, if all credit-risk-contingent features underlying these agreements
had been triggered on December 31, 2008, the Company would have been required to
post collateral of 100 percent of the loss position referred to above, or $528
million.

During
2008, a counterparty to certain of the Company’s fuel hedging derivative
contracts filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy
Code.  Per the contract, the Company was able to terminate its hedge
positions with this counterparty as a result of the counterparty’s
default.  Due to the decline in fuel prices subsequent to the Chapter
11 filing, the Company was in a liability position to this counterparty at the
time the hedge position was terminated.  The Company incurred a charge
of $26 million associated with these contracts during the period subsequent to
the Chapter 11 filing and prior to termination, when the derivative contracts no
longer qualified for hedge accounting under SFAS 133.  The charge was
recorded to Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations.  Had the Company retained these hedge positions, this
charge would have been incurred as fuel expense over the next two years assuming
a static fuel price from the termination date.
 

In fourth quarter of 2008,
the Company modified its fuel hedge portfolio, effectively settling certain
derivatives hedging 2009 jet fuel purchases. The Company entered into fuel
hedging collars to unwind certain trades with two of the Company’s
counterparties. The Company has de-designated these unwound hedges as
prescribed by SFAS 133, and entered into four directly counteractive economic
derivatives to, in effect, settle these positions.  At the date of
de-designation of these hedges, the Company had recorded a $205 million loss in
Accumulated other comprehensive income which will be reclassified into Aircraft
fuel expense in 2009.  The fair value of these offsetting positions
not designated as hedges under SFAS 133 as of December 31, 2008 was a $188
million asset recorded in Fuel derivative contracts and a $188 million liability
recorded in Fuel derivative liability.








7.         Financial Instruments and
Risk Management (Continued)

Fair Values of Financial
Instruments   The fair values of the Company's long-term
debt were estimated using quoted market prices where available.  For
long-term debt not actively traded, fair values were estimated using discounted
cash flow analyses, based on the Company's current incremental borrowing rates
for similar types of borrowing arrangements.

The
carrying amounts and estimated fair values of the Company's long-term debt,
including current maturities, were (in millions):




 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 

Carrying
      Value

 
 

Fair
Value

 
 

Carrying
      Value

 
 

Fair
Value

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Secured
      variable and fixed rate indebtedness

 
$
4,783
 
 
$
2,534
 
 
$
4,662
 
 
$
3,896
 



Enhanced
      equipment trust certificates

 
 
2,382
 
 
 
1,885
 
 
 
2,482
 
 
 
2,472
 



6.0%
      - 8.5% special facility revenue bonds

 
 
1,674
 
 
 
1,001
 
 
 
1,688
 
 
 
1,801
 



Credit
      facility agreement

 
 
691
 
 
 
545
 
 
 
440
 
 
 
423
 



4.25%
      - 4.50 % senior convertible notes

 
 
314
 
 
 
308
 
 
 
619
 
 
 
670
 



9.0%
      - 10.20% debentures

 
 
213
 
 
 
105
 
 
 
213
 
 
 
178
 



7.88%
      - 10.55% notes

 
 
211
 
 
 
96
 
 
 
211
 
 
 
195
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
10,268
 
 
$
6,474
 
 
$
10,315
 
 
$
9,635
 





8.         Income
Taxes

On
January 1, 2007, the Company adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board
Interpretation No. 48 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes” (FIN
48).  FIN 48 prescribes a recognition threshold that a tax position is
required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements and
provides guidance on derecognition, measurement, classification, interest and
penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition
issues.

The
Company has an unrecognized tax benefit of approximately $24 million which
decreased $16 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2008 due to
settlement of the 2001 through 2003 Internal Revenue Service
examination.  Changes in the unrecognized tax benefit have no impact
on the effective tax rate due to the existence of the valuation
allowance.  Accrued interest on tax positions is recorded as a
component of interest expense but is not significant at December 31,
2008.  

The
reconciliation of the beginning and ending amounts of unrecognized tax benefit
are (in millions):





 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Unrecognized
      Tax Benefit at January 1

 
$
40
 
 
$
41
 



   Decreases
      due to settlements with taxing authority

 
 
(16
)
 
 
(1
)



Unrecognized
      Tax Benefit at December 31

 
$
24
 
 
$
40
 





The
Company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefit may change within the next
twelve months depending on the outcome of the pending Internal Revenue Service
Appeals case.

The
Company files its tax returns as prescribed by the tax laws of the jurisdictions
in which it operates.   The Company’s 2004 through 2007 tax years
are still subject to examination by the Internal Revenue
Service.  Various state and foreign jurisdiction tax years remain open
to examination as well, though the Company believes that the effect of any
additional assessment(s) will be immaterial to its consolidated
financial statements.



 



 






 



8.         Income Taxes
(Continued)

The
income tax expense or benefit differed from amounts computed at the statutory
federal income tax rate as follows (in millions):




 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Statutory
      income tax provision expense/(benefit)

 
$
(725
)
 
$
176
 
 
$
81
 



State
      income tax expense/(benefit),
       net
      of federal tax effect

 
 
(49
)
 
 
10
 
 
 
15
 



Meal
      expense

 
 
8
 
 
 
9
 
 
 
7
 



Change
      in valuation allowance

 
 
791
 
 
 
(180
)
 
 
(124
)



Other,
      net

 
 
(25
)
 
 
(15
)
 
 
21
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Income
      tax benefit

 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 





In
addition to the changes in the valuation allowance from operations described in
the table above, the valuation allowance was also impacted by the changes in the
components of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), described in Note
12.  The total increase (decrease) in the valuation allowance was
$2,109 million, ($696) million, and ($18) million in 2008, 2007, and 2006,
respectively.

The
Company provides a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets when it is more
likely than not that some portion, or all of its deferred tax assets, will not
be realized. In assessing the realizability of the deferred tax assets,
management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion, or
all of the deferred tax assets, will be realized. The ultimate realization of
deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income
(including reversals of deferred tax liabilities) during the periods in which
those temporary differences will become deductible.

The
components of AMR's deferred tax assets and liabilities were (in
millions):






 
      
 

December
      31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Deferred
      tax assets:

 
 
 
 
 
 



Postretirement
      benefits other than pensions

 
$
1,168
 
 
$
1,162
 



Rent
      expense

 
 
437
 
 
 
487
 



Alternative
      minimum tax credit carryforwards

 
 
410
 
 
 
413
 



Operating
      loss carryforwards

 
 
2,268
 
 
 
2,269
 



Pensions

 
 
1,533
 
 
 
405
 



Frequent
      flyer obligation

 
 
338
 
 
 
308
 



Gains
      from lease transactions

 
 
98
 
 
 
98
 



Other

 
 
1,056
 
 
 
722
 



   Total
      deferred tax assets

 
 
7,308
 
 
 
5,864
 



Valuation
      allowance

 
 
(2,734
)
 
 
(625
)



Net
      deferred tax assets

 
 
4,574
 
 
 
5,239
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Deferred
      tax liabilities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Accelerated
      depreciation and amortization

 
 
(4,400
)
 
 
(4,960
)



Other

 
 
(174
)
 
 
(279
)



Total
      deferred tax liabilities

 
 
(4,574
)
 
 
(5,239
)



Net
      deferred tax liability

 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 







At
December 31, 2008, the Company had available for federal income tax purposes an
alternative minimum tax credit carryforward of approximately $410 million, which
is available for an indefinite period, and federal net operating losses of
approximately $6.6 billion for regular tax purposes, which will expire, if
unused, beginning in 2022.  These net operating losses include an
SFAS123(R) unrealized benefit of approximately $649 million related to the
implementation of SFAS 123(R) that will be recorded in equity when
realized.  The Company had available for state income tax purposes net
operating losses of $3.9 billion, which expire, if unused, in years 2009 through
2027. The amount that will expire in 2009 is $74 million.







8.         Income Taxes
(Continued)

Cash
payments (refunds) for income taxes were ($14) million, $7 million and $1
million for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively.

Under
special tax rules (the Section 382 Limitation), cumulative stock ownership
changes among material shareholders exceeding 50 percent during a 3-year period
can potentially limit a company’s future use of net operating losses and tax
credits (NOL’s).  The Section 382 limitation may be increased
by certain “built-in gains,” as provided by current IRS guidance.  Based on available
information, the Company believes it is not currently subject to the Section 382
Limitation.  If triggered under current conditions, the Section 382
limitation is not expected to significantly impact the recorded value of
deferred taxes or timing of utilization of the Company’s
NOL's.

9.         Share Based
Compensation

AMR
grants stock compensation under two plans: the 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan and
the 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan (the 2003 Plan).

Under the
1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, officers and key employees of AMR and
its subsidiaries may be granted certain types of stock or performance based
awards.  At December 31, 2008, the Company had stock option/settled
stock appreciation right (SSAR) awards, performance share awards, deferred share
awards and other awards outstanding under this plan.  The total number
of common shares authorized for distribution under the 1998 Long Term Incentive
Plan is 23,700,000 shares.  The 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, the
successor to the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan (collectively, the LTIP Plans),
was terminated in 2008.

In 2003,
the Company established the 2003 Plan to provide equity awards to
employees.  Under the 2003 Plan, employees may be granted stock
options/SSARs, restricted stock and deferred stock. At December 31, 2008, the
Company had stock options/SSARs and deferred awards outstanding under the 2003
Plan.  The total number of shares authorized for distribution under
the 2003 Plan is 42,680,000 shares.

In 2008,
2007 and 2006, the total charge for share-based compensation expense included in
wages, salaries and benefits expense was $53 million, $131 million and $219
million, respectively.  In 2008, 2007 and 2006, the amount of cash
used to settle equity instruments granted under share-based compensation plans
was $24 million, $11 million and $29 million, respectively.

Stock
Options/SSARs   During 2006, the AMR Board of Directors
approved an amendment covering all of the outstanding stock options previously
granted under the LTIP Plans. The Amendment added to each of the outstanding
options an additional stock settled stock appreciation right (SSAR) in tandem
with each of the then outstanding stock options. The addition of the SSAR did
not impact the fair value of the stock options, but simply allowed the Company
to settle the exercise of the option by issuing the net number of shares equal
to the in-the-money value of the option.  This amendment is estimated
to make available enough shares to permit the Company to settle all outstanding
performance and deferred share awards in stock rather than cash.

Options/SSARs
granted under the LTIP Plans and the 2003 Plan are awarded with an exercise
price equal to the fair market value of the stock on date of grant, become
exercisable in equal annual installments over periods ranging from two to five
years and expire no later than ten years from the date of
grant.  Expense for the options is recognized on a straight-line
basis.  The fair value of each award is estimated on the date of grant
using the modified Black-Scholes option valuation model and the assumptions
noted in the following table.  Expected volatilities are based on
implied volatilities from traded options on the Company’s stock, historical
volatility of the Company’s stock, and other factors.  The Company
uses historical employee exercise data to estimate the expected term of awards
granted used in the valuation model.  The risk-free rate is based on
the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant.  The
dividend yield is assumed to be zero based on the Company’s history and
expectation of not paying dividends.


 



 





 

9.           Share Based Compensation
(Continued)




 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Expected
      volatility

 

    53.0%
      to 55.9%

 
 

               49.7%
      to 51.6%

 
 

              
      52.5% to 55.0%

 



Expected
      term (in years)

 
 

4.0           
      

 
 
 
4.
      0         
 
 
 
4.0      
      
 



Risk-free
      rate

 

    2.98%
      to 3.15%

 
 

               4.43%
      to 5.03%

 
 

              
      4.35% to 5.07%

 



Annual
      forfeiture rate

 
 
10.0%       
      
 
 
 
10.0%    
 
 
 
10.0%    
      
 





A summary
of stock option/SSARs activity under the LTIP Plans and the 2003 Plan as of
December 31, 2008, and changes during the year then ended is presented
below:







 
      
 

LTIP
      Plans

 
 

The
      2003 Plan

 


 
      
 



 
 
 
Options/SSARs

 
 



Weighted
      Average
Exercise
      Price

 
 



 
 
 
Options

 
 



Weighted
      Average Exercise Price

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
11,844,615
 
 
$
27.76
 
 
 
14,276,053
 
 
$
5.66
 



Granted

 
 
2,722,740
 
 
 
8.23
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Exercised

 
 
(500
)
 
 
4.25
 
 
 
(347,057
)
 
 
5.25
 



Forfeited
      or Expired

 
 
(760,907
)
 
 
28.26
 
 
 
(119,004
)
 
 
6.83
 



 
     
      Outstanding at December 31

 
 
13,805,948
 
 
 
 23.88
 
 
 
13,809,992
 
 
 
 5.66
 



 
Exercisable
      at December 31

 
 
9,714,226
 
 
 
 28.48
 
 
 
13,491,727
 
 
 
 5.52
 



 
Weighted
      Average Remaining Contractual Term of Options Outstanding (in
      years)

 
 
    4.3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    4.4
 
 
 
 
 



 
Aggregate
      Intrinsic Value of Options Outstanding

 
$
 7,605,694
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
 70,509,340
 
 
 
 
 







The
aggregate intrinsic value of all vested options/SSARs is $71 million and those
options have an average remaining contractual life of 3.6 years.  The
weighted-average grant date fair value of options/SSARs granted during 2008,
2007 and 2006 was $3.78, $12.63 and $10.93, respectively.  The total
intrinsic value of options/SSARs exercised during 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $2
million, $193 million and $350 million, respectively.

A summary
of the status of the Company’s non-vested options/SSARs under all plans as of
December 31, 2008, and changes during the year ended December 31, 2008, is
presented below:




 
      
 
 
 
 



Weighted

 


 
      
 



 
Options/SSARs

 
 

Average
   
      Grant Date Fair Value

 



 
Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
2,965,521
 
 
$
8.07
 



Granted

 
 
2,722,740
 
 
 
3.78
 



Vested

 
 
(1,260,844
)
 
 
6.55
 



Forfeited

 
 
(17,430
)
 
 
4.78
 



  Outstanding
      at December 31

 
 
4,409,987
 
 
 
5.87
 











9.           Share Based Compensation
(Continued)

As of
December 31, 2008, there was $15 million of total unrecognized compensation cost
related to non-vested stock options/SSARs granted under the LTIP Plans and the
2003 Plan that is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of
3.3 years.  The total fair value of stock options/SSARs vested during
the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, was $9 million, $9 million and
$25 million, respectively.

Cash
received by the Company from exercise of stock options for the years ended
December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, was $1 million, $90 million and $230 million,
respectively.  No tax benefit was realized as a result of stock
options/SSARs exercised in 2008 due to the tax valuation allowance discussed in
Note 8.

Performance Share
Awards   During 2006 and 2007, the AMR Board of Directors
approved the amendment and restatement of all of the outstanding performance
share plans, the related performance share agreements and deferred share
agreements that required settlement in cash (collectively, the Amended
Plans).  The plans were amended to permit settlement in a combination
of cash and/or stock; however, the amendments did not impact the fair value of
the awards under the Amended Plans.  As a result of these actions, any
amounts accrued as liabilities at the time of conversion or at the time it
became probable that sufficient shares would be available to settle the Amended
Plans were reclassified from accrued liabilities to Additional paid-in
capital.  Accordingly, these awards are now accounted for as market
condition awards in accordance with SFAS 123(R).

Performance
share awards are granted under the LTIP Plans, generally vest pursuant to a
three year measurement period and are settled on the vesting
date.  The number of awards ultimately issued under performance share
awards is contingent on AMR’s relative stock price performance compared to
certain of its competitors over a three year period and can range from zero to
175 percent of the awards granted.  The fair value of performance
awards is calculated by multiplying the stock price on the date of grant by the
expected payout percentage and the number of shares granted.

Activity
during 2008 for performance awards accounted for as equity awards
was:
 




 
      
 



 
Awards

 


Weighted AverageRemaining
      Contractual Term

 

Aggregate
      Intrinsic Value



 
      
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
      



Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
5,400,441
 
 
      
 
 
      



Reclassified
      to liability awards

 
 
(97,215
)
 
      
 
 
      



Granted

 
 
2,850,240
 
 
      
 
 
      



Settled

 
 
(2,330,852
)
 
      
 
 
      



Forfeited
      or Expired

 
 
(56,361
)
 
      
 
 
      



 
 
            Outstanding at December 31

 
 
5,766,253
 

 
1.5

 

 
$   61,360,092






The
aggregate intrinsic value represents the Company’s current estimate of the
number of shares (5,750,712 shares at December 31, 2008) that will ultimately be
distributed for outstanding awards computed using the market value of the
Company’s common stock at December 31, 2008.  The weighted-average
grant date fair value per share of performance share awards granted during 2008,
2007, and 2006 was $8.20, $28.52 and $25.01, respectively.  The total
fair value of equity awards settled during the year ended December 31, 2008 was
$14 million.  As of December 31, 2008, there was $38 million of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to performance share awards that is
expected to be recognized over a period of 1.6 years.

Deferred
Awards   The distribution of deferred share awards granted
under the LTIP Plans is based solely on a requisite service period (generally 36
months).  Career equity awards granted to certain employees of the
Company vest upon the retirement of those individuals.  The fair value
of each deferred award is based on AMR’s stock price on the measurement
date.

 

 






 



9.           Share Based Compensation
(Continued)

Activity
during 2008 for deferred awards accounted for as equity awards was:
 




 
      
 



 
Shares

 


Weighted
      Average Remaining
      Contractual Term

 

 
Aggregate
      Intrinsic Value



 
      
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
      



Outstanding
      at January 1

 
 
3,668,797
 
 
      
 
 
      



Granted

 
 
1,009,278
 
 
      
 
 
      



Settled

 
 
(565,235
)
 
      
 
 
      



Forfeited
      or Expired

 
 
(64,962
)
 
      
 
 
      



 
     
      Outstanding at December 31

 
 
4,047,878
 

 
3.9

 

 
$   43,190,858






The
weighted-average grant date fair value per share of deferred awards granted
during 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $8.23, $28.54 and $25.12,
respectively.  The total fair value of awards settled during the years
ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $6 million, $24 million and $4
million, respectively.  As of December 31, 2008, there was $25 million
of total unrecognized compensation cost related to deferred awards that is
expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 3.4
years.

Other
Awards   As of December 31, 2008, certain performance
share agreements and deferred share award agreements were accounted for as a
liability, or as equity, as appropriate, in the consolidated balance sheet as
the plans only permit settlement in cash or the awards required that the
employee meet certain performance conditions which were not subject to market
measurement.  As a result, SFAS 123(R) required awards under these
agreements to be marked to current market value.  As of December 31,
2008, the aggregate intrinsic value of these awards was $7 million and the
weighted average remaining contractual term of these awards was 2.2
years.  The total fair value of awards settled during the years ended
December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 was $24 million, $11 million, and $29 million
respectively.  As of December 31, 2008, there was $3 million of total
unrecognized compensation cost related to other awards that is expected to be
recognized over a weighted average period of 4.4 years.

10.         Retirement
Benefits

All
employees of the Company may participate in pension plans if they meet the
plans’ eligibility requirements.  The defined benefit plans provide
benefits for participating employees based on years of service and average
compensation for a specified period of time before retirement. The Company uses
a December 31 measurement date for all of its defined benefit plans. American’s
pilots also participate in a defined contribution plan for which Company
contributions are determined as a percentage (11 percent) of participant
compensation.  Certain non-contract employees (including all new
non-contract employees) participate in a defined contribution plan in which the
Company will match the employees’ before-tax contribution on a dollar-for-dollar
basis, up to 5.5 percent of their pensionable pay.

In
addition to pension benefits, retiree medical and other postretirement benefits,
including certain health care and life insurance benefits (which provide
secondary coverage to Medicare), are provided to retired
employees.  The amount of health care benefits is limited to lifetime
maximums as outlined in the plan.  Substantially all regular employees
of American and employees of certain other subsidiaries may become eligible for
these benefits if they satisfy eligibility requirements during their working
lives.

Certain
employee groups make contributions toward funding a portion of their retiree
health care benefits during their working lives.  The Company funds
benefits as incurred and makes contributions to match employee
prefunding.



 



 





 

10.           Retirement Benefits
(Continued)

In 2007,
the Fair Treatment for Experienced Pilots Act (H.R. 4343) was signed into law,
raising the mandatory retirement age for commercial pilots from 60 to
65.  Previously, the FAA required commercial pilots to retire once
they reached age 60.  As a result, the Company has estimated the
average retirement age for the pilot workgroup to be 63, based on the
approximate retirement age of the Company’s other work groups, which did not
have the same mandatory retirement age.  This change in the estimate
of pilot retirement age caused a decrease to the pension and other
postretirement liability of approximately $543 million at December 31,
2007.

The
following table provides a reconciliation of the changes in the pension and
retiree medical and other benefit obligations and fair value of assets for the
years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, and a statement of funded status as of
December 31, 2008 and 2007 (in millions):













 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Reconciliation of benefit
      obligation

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Obligation
      at January 1

 
$
10,451
 
 
$
11,048
 
 
$
2,672
 
 
$
3,256
 



Service
      cost

 
 
324
 
 
 
370
 
 
 
54
 
 
 
71
 



Interest
      cost

 
 
684
 
 
 
672
 
 
 
172
 
 
 
194
 



Actuarial
      (gain) loss

 
 
254
 
 
 
(1,021
)
 
 
22
 
 
 
(693
)



Plan
      amendments

 
 
(14
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Benefit
      payments

 
 
(815
)
 
 
(618
)
 
 
(141
)
 
 
(156
)



Obligation
      at December 31

 
$
10,884
 
 
$
10,451
 
 
$
2,779
 
 
$
2,672
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Reconciliation of fair value of plan
      assets

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Fair
      value of plan assets at January 1

 
$
9,099
 
 
$
8,565
 
 
$
224
 
 
$
202
 



Actual
      return on plan assets

 
 
(1,659
)
 
 
766
 
 
 
(75
)
 
 
9
 



Employer
      contributions

 
 
89
 
 
 
386
 
 
 
153
 
 
 
168
 



Benefit
      payments

 
 
(815
)
 
 
(618
)
 
 
(141
)
 
 
(155
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Fair
      value of plan assets at December 31

 
$
6,714
 
 
$
9,099
 
 
$
161
 
 
$
224
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Funded
      status at December 31

 
$
(4,170
)
 
$
(1,352
)
 
$
(2,618
)
 
$
(2,448
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Amounts recognized in the
consolidated balance sheets

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Current
      liability

 
$
11
 
 
$
6
 
 
$
163
 
 
$
170
 



Noncurrent
      liability

 
 
4,159
 
 
 
1,346
 
 
 
2,455
 
 
 
2,278
 


 
      
 
$
4,170
 
 
$
1,352
 
 
$
2,618
 
 
$
2,448
 



 
Amounts recognized in
other comprehensive loss

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      actuarial loss (gain)

 
$
2,839
 
 
$
245
 
 
$
(458
)
 
$
(605
)



Prior
      service cost (credit)

 
 
108
 
 
 
137
 
 
 
(53
)
 
 
(65
)


 
      
 
$
2,947
 
 
$
382
 
 
$
(511
)
 
$
(670
)




















For plans with accumulated
      benefit
obligations exceeding the fair
      value
of plan assets

 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 



Projected
      benefit obligation (PBO)

 
$
10,884
 
 
$
10,451
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 



Accumulated
      benefit obligation (ABO)

 
 
9,656
 
 
 
9,486
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Accumulated
      postretirement benefit obligation (APBO)

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
2,779
 
 
 
2,672
 



Fair
      value of plan assets

 
 
6,714
 
 
 
9,099
 
 
 
161
 
 
 
224
 



ABO
      less fair value of plan assets

 
 
2,942
 
 
 
387
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 




















10.         Retirement Benefits
(Continued)

At
December 31, 2008 and 2007, pension benefit plan assets of $460 million and $127
million, respectively, and retiree medical and other benefit plan assets of $158
million and $220 million, respectively, were invested in shares of certain
mutual funds.

The
following tables provide the components of net periodic benefit cost for the
years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 (in millions):







 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



Components of net periodic benefit
      cost

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Defined
      benefit plans:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Service
      cost

 
$
324
 
 
$
370
 
 
$
399
 



Interest
      cost

 
 
684
 
 
 
672
 
 
 
641
 



Expected
      return on assets

 
 
(789
)
 
 
(747
)
 
 
(669
)



Amortization
      of:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Transition
      asset

 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(1
)



Prior
      service cost

 
 
16
 
 
 
16
 
 
 
16
 



Settlement

 
 
103
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Unrecognized
      net loss

 
 
3
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
81
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      periodic benefit cost for defined benefit plans

 
 
 341
 
 
 
336
 
 
 
467
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Defined
      contribution plans

 
 
170
 
 
 
166
 
 
 
164
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
      
 
$
511
 
 
$
502
 
 
$
631
 













 
      
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Components of net periodic benefit
      cost

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Service
      cost

 
$
54
 
 
$
70
 
 
$
78
 



Interest
      cost

 
 
172
 
 
 
194
 
 
 
194
 



Expected
      return on assets

 
 
(20
)
 
 
(18
)
 
 
(15
)



Amortization
      of:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Prior
      service cost

 
 
(13
)
 
 
(13
)
 
 
(10
)



Unrecognized
      net loss (gain)

 
 
(22
)
 
 
(7
)
 
 
1
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Net
      periodic benefit cost

 
$
171
 
 
$
226
 
 
$
248
 






The
estimated net loss and prior service cost for the defined benefit pension plans
that will be amortized from Accumulated other comprehensive income into net
periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year are $145 million and $8 million,
respectively.  The estimated net gain and prior service credit for the
retiree medical and other postretirement plans that will be amortized from
Accumulated other comprehensive income into net periodic benefit cost over the
next fiscal year are $14 million and $8 million, respectively.






 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Weighted-average assumptions used to determine
      benefit obligations as of December 31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Discount
      rate

 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.50
%



Salary
      scale (ultimate)

 
 
3.78
 
 
 
3.78
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



 

 






 





10.         Retirement Benefits
(Continued)






 
      
 

Pension
      Benefits

 
 

Retiree
      Medical and Other Benefits

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Weighted-average assumptions used to determine net
      periodic benefit cost for the years ended December
    31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Discount
      rate

 
 
6.50
%
 
 
6.00
%
 
 
6.00
%
 
 
6.00
%



Salary
      scale (ultimate)

 
 
3.78
 
 
 
3.78
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 



Expected
      return on plan assets

 
 
8.75
 
 
 
8.75
 
 
 
8.75
 
 
 
8.75
 






As of
December 31, 2008, the Company’s estimate of the long-term rate of return on
plan assets was 8.75 percent based on the target asset
allocation.  Expected returns on longer duration bonds are based on
yields to maturity of the bonds held at year-end.  Expected returns on
other assets are based on a combination of long-term historical returns, actual
returns on plan assets achieved over the last ten years, current and expected
market conditions, and expected value to be generated through active management,
currency overlay and securities lending programs.  The Company’s
annualized ten-year rate of return on plan assets as of December 31, 2008, was
approximately 6.81 percent.

The
Company’s pension plan weighted-average asset allocations at December 31, by
asset category, are as follows:






 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Long
      duration bonds

 
 
48
%
 
 
41
%



U.S.
      stocks

 
 
22
 
 
 
26
 



International
      stocks

 
 
15
 
 
 
21
 



Emerging
      markets stocks and bonds

 
 
4
 
 
 
5
 



Alternative
      (private) investments

 
 
11
 
 
 
7
 



 
     Total

 
 
100
%
 
 
100
%






The
Company’s target asset allocation is 35 percent longer duration corporate and
U.S. government/agency bonds, 25 percent U.S. value stocks, 20 percent developed
international stocks, five percent emerging markets stocks and bonds, and 15
percent alternative (private) investments. Each asset class is actively managed
and, historically, the plans’ assets have produced returns, net of management
fees, in excess of the expected rate of return over the last ten years. Stocks
and emerging market bonds are used to provide diversification and are expected
to generate higher returns over the long-term than longer duration U.S. bonds.
Public stocks are managed using a value investment approach in order to
participate in the returns generated by stocks in the long-term, while reducing
year-over-year volatility. Longer duration U.S. bonds are used to partially
hedge the assets from declines in interest rates. Alternative (private)
investments are used to provide expected returns in excess of the public markets
over the long-term.  Additionally, the Company engages currency
overlay managers in an attempt to increase returns by protecting non-U.S. dollar
denominated assets from a rise in the relative value of the U.S.
dollar.  The Company also participates in securities lending programs
to generate additional income by loaning plan assets to borrowers on a fully
collateralized basis.  These programs are subject to market
risk.






 
      
 

Pre-65
      Individuals

 
 

Post-65
      Individuals

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2008

 
 

2007

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Assumed health care trend rates at December
      31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Health
      care cost trend rate assumed for next year

 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%
 
 
7.5
%
 
 
7.0
%



Rate
      to which the cost trend rate is assumed to decline (the ultimate trend
      rate)

 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%
 
 
4.5
%



Year
      that the rate reaches the ultimate trend rate

 



           2015

 
 



          
      2010

 
 



           2015

 
 



           2010

 





 

















10.         Retirement Benefits
(Continued)

A one
percentage point change in the assumed health care cost trend rates would have
the following effects (in millions):





 
      
 

One
      Percent Increase

 
 

One
      Percent Decrease

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 



Impact
      on 2008 service and interest cost

 
 
20
 
 
 
(20
)



Impact
      on postretirement benefit obligation
  as
      of December 31, 2008

 
 
224
 
 
 
(219
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





The
Company has no required 2009 contributions to its defined benefit pension plans
under the provisions of the Pension Funding Equity Act of 2004 and the Pension
Protection Act of 2006.  The Company’s estimates of its defined
benefit pension plan contributions reflect the current provisions of the Pension
Funding Equity Act of 2004 and the Pension Protection Act of
2006.  The Company expects to contribute approximately $13 million to
its retiree medical and other benefit plan in 2009.

The
following benefit payments, which reflect expected future service as
appropriate, are expected to be paid:








 
 
 

 

 
 

Retiree
      Medical 

 


 
 
 

     Pension

 
 

  and
      Other

 



2009

 
 
$
514
 
 
$
163
 



2010

 
 
 
565
 
 
 
168
 



2011

 
 
 
587
 
 
 
176
 



2012

 
 
 
617
 
 
 
175
 



2013

 
 
 
728
 
 
 
181
 


2014
      - 2018
 
 
 
 
4,372
 
 
 
1,007
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 








During
2008, AMR recorded a settlement charge totaling $103 million related to lump sum
distributions from the Company’s defined benefit pension plans to pilots who
retired.   Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 88,
"Employers’ Accounting for Settlements and Curtailments of Defined Benefit
Pension Plans and for Termination Benefits" ("SFAS 88"), requires the use of
settlement accounting if, for a given year, the cost of all settlements exceeds,
or is expected to exceed, the sum of the service cost and interest cost
components of net periodic pension expense for a plan. Under settlement
accounting, unrecognized plan gains or losses must be recognized immediately in
proportion to the percentage reduction of the plan's projected benefit
obligation.



 



 






 



11.         Intangible
Assets

In April
2007, the United States and the EU approved an “open skies” air services
agreement that provides airlines from the United States and EU member states
open access to each other’s markets, with freedom of pricing and unlimited
rights to fly beyond the United States and any airport in the EU including
London’s Heathrow Airport.  The provisions of the agreement were
effective on March 30, 2008.  Under the agreement, every U.S. and EU
airline is authorized to operate between airports in the United States and
Heathrow.  Notwithstanding the open skies agreement, Heathrow is a
slot-controlled airport.  Only three airlines besides American were
previously allowed to provide that Heathrow service.  The Company has
recorded route acquisition costs (including international routes and slots) of
$828 million and $846 million as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively,
including a significant amount related to operations at Heathrow.  The
Company considers these assets indefinite life assets under Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards No. 142 “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” and as a
result, they are not amortized but instead are tested for impairment annually or
more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset
might be impaired.  The Company has completed an impairment analysis
and has concluded that no impairment exists.

The
following tables provide information relating to the Company’s amortized
intangible assets as of December 31 (in millions):






 
      
 

2008

 


 
      
 



Cost

 
 

Accumulated
      Amortization

 
 

Net
      Book Value

 



Amortized
      intangible assets:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airport
      operating rights

 
$
515
 
 
$
302
 
 
$
213
 



Gate
      lease rights

 
 
182
 
 
 
114
 
 
 
68
 



Total

 
$
697
 
 
$
416
 
 
$
281
 











 
      
 

2007

 


 
      
 



Cost

 
 

Accumulated
      Amortization

 
 

Net
      Book Value

 



Amortized
      intangible assets:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Airport
      operating rights

 
$
517
 
 
$
282
 
 
$
235
 



Gate
      lease rights

 
 
182
 
 
 
107
 
 
 
75
 



Total

 
$
699
 
 
$
389
 
 
$
310
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 






Airport
operating and gate lease rights are being amortized on a straight-line basis
over 25 years to a zero residual value.  The Company recorded
amortization expense related to these intangible assets of approximately $28
million for each of the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006,
respectively. The Company expects to record annual amortization expense of
approximately $27 million in each of the next five years related to these
intangible assets.



 



 






 



12.         Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income (Loss)

The
components of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) are as follows (in
millions):




 
      
 



Pension
      and Retiree Medical Liability

 
 



 
Unrealized
      Gain/(Loss) on Investments

 
 



 
 
Derivative
      Financial Instruments

 
 



 
 
Income
Tax
      Benefit

 
 



 
 
 
 
Total

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Balance
      at January 1, 2006

 
$
(1,206
)
 
$
3
 
 
$
79
 
 
$
145
 
 
$
(979
)



Current
      year net change

 
 
748
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
748
 



Reclassification
      of derivative financial instruments into earnings

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(88
)
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(88
)



Change
      in fair value of derivative financial instruments

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  26
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  26
 



    Adjustment
      resulting from adoption of SFAS 158

 
 
(998
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(998
)



Balance
      at December 31, 2006

 
$
(1,456
)
 
$
3
 
 
$
17
 
 
$
145
 
 
$
(1,291
)



Current
      year change

 
 
1,723
 
 
 
(6
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
1,717
 



Amortization
      of actuarial loss and prior service cost

 
 
 21
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 21
 



Reclassification
      of derivative financial instruments into earnings

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(158
)
 
 
  -
 
 
 
(158
)



Change
      in fair value of derivative
      financial instruments

 
 
  -
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
  381
 
 
 
  -
 
 
 
   381
 



Balance
      at December 31, 2007

 
$
288
 
 
$
(3
)
 
$
240
 
 
$
145
 
 
$
670
 



Current
      year change

 
 
(2,707
)
 
 
(7
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(2,714
)



Amortization
      of actuarial loss and prior service cost

 
 
(17
)
 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
 -
 
 
 
(17
)



Reclassification
      of derivative financial instruments into earnings

 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(378
)
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(378
)



Change
      in fair value of derivative
      financial instruments

 
 
   -
 
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(738
)
 
 
   -
 
 
 
(738
)



Balance
      at December 31, 2008

 
$
(2,436
)
 
$
(10
)
 
$
(876
)
 
$
145
 
 
$
(3,177
)





As of
December 31, 2008, the Company estimates that during the next twelve months it
will reclassify from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings
approximately $711 million in net losses (based on prices as of December 31,
2008) related to its fuel derivative hedges, including losses from terminated
contracts with a bankrupt counterparty and unwound trades as described in Note 7
“Financial Instruments and Risk Management”


 



 






 



13.         Earnings (Loss) Per
Share

The
following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings (loss)
per share (in millions, except per share amounts):





 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 



    
      Numerator:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



     Net
      earnings (loss) – numerator for basic earnings (loss) per
      share

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
504
 
 
$
231
 



    
      Interest on senior convertible notes

 
 
-
 
 
 
27
 
 
 
27
 



     Net
      earnings (loss) adjusted for interest on senior convertible notes –
      numerator for diluted earnings per share

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
 531
 
 
$
 258
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Denominator:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



     Denominator
      for basic earnings (loss) per share – weighted average
    shares

 
 
259
 
 
 
245
 
 
 
205
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Effect of dilutive securities:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   
         Senior convertible notes

 
 
-
 
 
 
32
 
 
 
32
 



   
         Employee options and shares

 
 
-
 
 
 
34
 
 
 
44
 



   
         Assumed treasury shares purchased

 
 
-
 
 
 
(12
)
 
 
(17
)



    
      Diluted potential common shares

 
 
-
 
 
 
54
 
 
 
59
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Denominator for diluted earnings loss per share – weighted-average
      shares

 
 
259
 
 
 
299
 
 
 
264
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Basic earnings (loss) per share

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
2.06
 
 
$
1.13
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



    
      Diluted earnings (loss) per share

 
$
(7.98
)
 
$
1.78
 
 
$
0.98
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





For the
year ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, approximately 13 million and 7 million
shares related to employee stock options were not added to the denominator
because the options’ exercise prices were greater than the average market price
of the common shares.  Approximately 36 million shares related to the
Company’s convertible notes, employee stock options and deferred stock were not
added to the denominator for the year ended December 31, 2008 because inclusion
of such shares would be antidilutive.

14.         Segment
Reporting

The
Company's operations of American and AMR Eagle are treated as an integrated
route network and the route scheduling system maximizes the operating results of
the Company.  The Company's chief operating decision maker makes
resource allocation decisions to maximize the Company's consolidated financial
results.  Based on the way the Company treats the network and the
manner in which resource allocation decisions are made, the Company has only one
operating segment for financial reporting purposes consisting of the operations
of American and AMR Eagle.

American,
AMR Eagle and the AmericanConnection® airlines serve 250 cities in 40 countries
with, on average, more than 3,400 daily flights. The combined network fleet
numbers approximately 900 aircraft.  American is also one of the
largest scheduled air freight carriers in the world, providing a wide range of
freight and mail services to shippers throughout its system onboard American’s
passenger fleet.  AMR Eagle owns two regional airlines, which do
business as "American Eagle” - American Eagle Airlines, Inc. and Executive
Airlines, Inc.  The American Eagle® carriers provide connecting
service from nine of American's high-traffic cities to smaller markets
throughout the United States, Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean.




 



 






 



14.         Segment Reporting
(Continued)

Revenues
from other segments are below the quantitative threshold for determining
reportable segments and consist primarily of revenues from American Beacon
Advisors, Inc. (divested in 2008) and Americas Ground Services,
Inc.  The difference between the financial information of the
Company’s one reportable segment and the financial information included in the
accompanying consolidated statements of operations and balance sheets as a
result of these entities is not material.

In 2008,
the Company announced that it had reached a definitive agreement with Lighthouse
Holdings, Inc., which is owned by investment funds affiliated with TPG Capital,
L.P. and Pharos Capital Group, LLC for the sale of American Beacon Advisors,
Inc. (American Beacon), its wholly-owned asset management subsidiary. On
September 12, 2008, AMR completed the sale of American Beacon which resulted in
a net gain of $432 million.  The gain on the sale is included in
Miscellaneous-net in the accompanying consolidated statement of
operations.  While primarily a cash transaction, the Company also
maintained a minority equity stake in American Beacon.  As the Company has
significant continuing involvement with American Beacon post-sale, AMR does not
account for the disposal of American Beacon as discontinued
operations.

The
Company’s operating revenues by geographic region (as defined by the Department
of Transportation) are summarized below (in millions):






 
      
 

Year
      Ended December 31,

 


 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



DOT
      Domestic

 
$
14,135
 
 
$
14,179
 
 
$
14,159
 



DOT
      Latin America

 
 
4,927
 
 
 
4,268
 
 
 
4,024
 



DOT
      Atlantic

 
 
3,671
 
 
 
3,556
 
 
 
3,409
 



DOT
      Pacific

 
 
1,033
 
 
 
932
 
 
 
971
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total
      consolidated revenues

 
$
23,766
 
 
$
22,935
 
 
$
22,563
 






The
Company attributes operating revenues by geographic region based upon the origin
and destination of each flight segment.  The Company’s tangible assets
consist primarily of flight equipment, which are mobile across geographic
markets and, therefore, have not been allocated.

15.         Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited)

Unaudited
summarized financial data by quarter for 2008 and 2007 (in millions, except per
share amounts):





 
      
 

First
Quarter

 
 

Second
      Quarter

 
 

Third
      Quarter

 
 

Fourth
      Quarter

 



2008

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      revenues

 
$
5,697
 
 
$
6,179
 
 
$
6,421
 
 
$
5,469
 



Operating
      income (loss)

 
 
(187
)
 
 
(1,290
)
 
 
(216
)
 
 
(196
)



Net
      earnings (loss)

 
 
(328
)
 
 
(1,448
)
 
 
45
 
 
 
(340
)



Earnings
      (loss) per share:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Basic

 
 
(1.32
)
 
 
(5.77
)
 
 
0.17
 
 
 
(1.22
)



Diluted

 
 
(1.32
)
 
 
(5.77
)
 
 
0.17
 
 
 
(1.22
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



2007

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Operating
      revenues

 
$
5,427
 
 
$
5,879
 
 
$
5,946
 
 
$
5,683
 



Operating
      income (loss)

 
 
248
 
 
 
467
 
 
 
319
 
 
 
(69
)



Net
      earnings (loss)

 
 
81
 
 
 
317
 
 
 
175
 
 
 
(69
)



Earnings
      (loss) per share:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Basic

 
 
0.35
 
 
 
1.28
 
 
 
0.70
 
 
 
(0.28
)



Diluted

 
 
0.30
 
 
 
1.08
 
 
 
0.61
 
 
 
(0.28
)





The third
quarter 2007 results include a charge of $40 million to correct certain vacation
accruals included in Wages, salaries and benefits expense.  Of this
amount, $30 million is related to the years 2003 through
2006.  







15.         Quarterly Financial Data
(Unaudited) (Continued)

The
fourth quarter 2007 results include the impact of several items,
including:  a $138 million gain on the sale of AMR’s stake in ARINC
included in Other Income, Miscellaneous – net, a $39 million gain to reflect the
positive impact of the change to an 18-month expiration of AAdvantage miles
included in Passenger revenue, and a $63 million charge associated with the
retirement of 24 MD-80 aircraft and certain other equipment that previously had
been temporarily stored included in Spceial charges.

The
second quarter 2008 results include an impairment charge of $1.1 billion to
write the McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and Embraer RJ-135 fleets and certain related
long-lived assets down to their estimated fair values, and a $55 million accrual
for employee severance costs.

The
Company’s third quarter 2008 results include the sale of American Beacon for
total proceeds of $442 million with a net gain of $432 million and $27 million
of special charges due to continued capacity reduction effects.

The
results of the fourth quarter of 2008 were impacted by a pension settlement
charge of $103 million for one of the Company’s defined benefit
plans.




 



 






 



ITEM
9.                 CHANGES
IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL
DISCLOSURE

None.

ITEM
9A.                      CONTROLS
AND PROCEDURES

Management’s
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures

The term
“disclosure controls and procedures” is defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or the Exchange Act. This term refers to
the controls and procedures of a company that are designed to ensure that
information required to be disclosed by a company in the reports that it files
under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within
the time periods specified by the Securities and Exchange Commission. An
evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of the
Company’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Chief
Financial Officer (CFO), of the effectiveness of the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures as of December 31, 2008.  Based on that
evaluation, the Company’s management, including the CEO and CFO, concluded that
the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of December
31, 2008. During the quarter ending on December 31, 2008, there was no change in
the Company’s internal control over financial reporting that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting.

Management’s
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting

Management
of the Company is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective
internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The Company’s internal control over financial
reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles.

Because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements. Therefore, even those systems determined to be
effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial
statement preparation and presentation.

Management
assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2008 using the criteria set forth in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission.
Based on this assessment, management believes that, as of December 31,
2008, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective
based on those criteria.

The
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31,
2008, has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, the independent registered
public accounting firm who also audited the Company’s consolidated financial
statements. Ernst & Young LLP’s attestation report on the effectiveness of
the Company’s internal control over financial reporting appears
below.


 
/s/ Gerard J.
Arpey                                                           
Gerard J.
Arpey
Chairman,
President and Chief Executive Officer



/s/ Thomas W.
Horton                                                                           
Thomas W.
Horton
Executive
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer



 



 






 



Report
of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm


The Board
of Directors and Shareholders
AMR
Corporation

We have
audited AMR Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2008, based on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (the COSO criteria). AMR Corporation’s management is responsible for
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting
included in the accompanying “Management’s Report on Internal Control over
Financial Reporting.” Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the
company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our
audit.

We
conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective
internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material
respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over
financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based
upon the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable
basis for our opinion.

A
company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2)
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of
the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
assets that could have a material effect on the financial
statements.

Because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements.  Also, projections of any evaluation
of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may
become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

In our
opinion, AMR Corporation maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2008, based on the
COSO criteria.

We also
have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated balance sheets of AMR
Corporation as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 and the related consolidated
statements of operations, stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flows for each
of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2008 of AMR Corporation and
related financial statement schedule and our report dated February 18, 2009
expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.



/s/
Ernst & Young LLP


Dallas,
Texas
February
18, 2009


 



 






 








PART
      III





ITEM
10.                      DIRECTORS
AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.  Information concerning the
executive officers is included in Part I of this report on page 25 and
information concerning the Company’s code of ethics in included in Part I of
this report on page 10.

ITEM
11.                     EXECUTIVE
COMPENSATION

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.

ITEM
12.                     SECURITY
OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT

Equity Compensation Plan
Information




 
      
 



 
 
Number
      of securities to be issued upon exercise of outstanding options, warrants
      and rights

 
 



 
 
 
 
Weighted-average
      exercise price of outstanding options, warrants and rights

 
 

Number
      of securities remaining available for future issuance under equity
      compensation plans (excluding securities reflected in the first
      column)

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equity
      compensation plans approved by security holders

 
 
 13,805,948
 
 
$
23.88
 
 
 
-
**


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Equity
      compensation plans not approved by security holders

 
 
13,809,992
*
 
$
 5.66
 
 
 
   614,228
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Total

 
 
27,615,940
 
 
$
14.77
 
 
 
614,228
 









 
      


*


Represents
      13,809,992 options granted under the 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan
      (the ESIP).  The ESIP was implemented in accordance with the
      rules of the New York Stock
Exchange.








 
      


**


Additional
      shares may become available for future use as certain employee stock
      options are settled as SSARs.





See Note
9 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding
the equity compensation plans included above.

The
information required by Item 403 of Regulation S-K is incorporated herein by
reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual meeting
of stockholders on May 20, 2009.

ITEM
13.                     CERTAIN
RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.



 



 






 



ITEM
14.                      PRINCIPAL
ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES

Incorporated
herein by reference from the Company's definitive proxy statement for the annual
meeting of stockholders on May 20, 2009.






PART
      IV





ITEM
15.                                                      EXHIBITS
AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES






(a)


(1)


The
      following financial statements and Independent Auditors’ Report are filed
      as part of this report:










 
      
 

Page

 


 
      
 
 
 



        Report
      of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm

 
 
51
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Statements of Operations for the Years Ended
        December 31,
      2008, 2007 and 2006

 
 
 52
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Balance Sheets at December 31, 2008 and 2007

 
 
53-54
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended
        December 31,
      2008, 2007 and 2006

 
 
 55
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Consolidated
      Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit) for the Years
      Ended
        December 31,
      2008, 2007 and 2006

 
 
 56
 


 
      
 
 
 
 



        Notes
      to Consolidated Financial Statements

 
 
57-85
 









 
      


(2)


The
      following financial statement schedule is filed as part of this
      report:








 
      
 

Page

 


 
      
 
 
 



        Schedule II
      Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves

 
 
103
 









 
      


Schedules
      not included have been omitted because they are not applicable or because
      the required information is included in the consolidated financial
      statements or notes thereto.







 



 






 







 
      


(3)


Exhibits
      required to be filed by Item 601 of Regulation S-K. (Where the amount of
      securities authorized to be issued under any of AMR's long-term debt
      agreements does not exceed 10 percent of AMR's assets, pursuant to
      paragraph (b)(4) of Item 601 of Regulation S-K, in lieu of filing such as
      an exhibit, AMR hereby agrees to furnish to the Commission upon request a
      copy of any agreement with respect to such long-term debt.) The
      exhibits include amendments to the following agreements approved by the
      Board of Directors of AMR on November 17, 2008, to be effective as of
      January 1, 2005 (unless otherwise specified), which were amended to
      ensure compliance with Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
      as amended, and other tax regulations:  Trust Agreement Under
      Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan $uper $aver Plus Plan, as amended
      and restated as of June 1, 2007 (filed as Exhibit 10.129), Trust Agreement
      Under Supplemental Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
      Inc., as amended and restated as of June 1, 2007 (filed as Exhibit
      10.127), Supplemental Employee Retirement Program for Officers of American
      Airlines Inc., as amended and restated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as
      Exhibit 10.128), First Amendment to AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit
      Incentive Plan, dated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.4, AMR
      Corporation 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan, as amended as of January
      1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.151), AMR Corporation Amended and Restated
      Directors Pension Benefits Plan, effective as of January 1, 2005 (filed as
      Exhibit 10.149), Amended and Restated Air Transportation Plan for
      Non-Employee Directors of AMR Corporation, effective as of January 1, 2005
      (filed as Exhibit 10.150), AMR Corporation Procedures for Deferral of
      Board Retainers and Fees (an amendment and restatement of the Directors
      Stock Equivalent Purchase Plan), as amended and restated as of January 1,
      2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.135), AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive
      Plan (filed as Exhibit 10.142), First Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994
      Directors Stock Incentive Plan, dated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as
      Exhibit 10.152), Form of Amendment to Career Equity Program Deferred Stock
      Award Agreement for Employees and Senior Officers, dated as of January 1,
      2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.105), Form of Amendment to Career Equity Program
      Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Employees and Senior Officers, dated as
      of January 1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 10.106), Form of Amendment Executive
      Termination Benefits, dated as of January 1, 2005 (filed as Exhibit
      10.124).









 
      


Exhibit









 
      


             
       3.1


Restated
      Certificate of Incorporation of AMR, incorporated by reference to AMR’s
      Registration Statement on Form S-4, file number
  33-55191.









3.2  


Bylaws
      of AMR Corporation, amended and restated as of January 20, 2009,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to AMR’s report on Form 8-K on
      January 23, 2009.









3.3  


Amendments
      to the AMR Corporation Certificate of Incorporation, incorporated by
      reference to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended
      September 30, 2003.









10.1  


Compensation
      and Benefit Agreement relative to the retirement of Robert L. Crandall,
      between AMR and Robert L. Crandall, dated September 18, 1998, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 1998.









10.2  


Description
      of informal arrangement relating to deferral of payment of directors'
      fees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10(c)(11) to American's
      Registration Statement No. 2-76709.









10.3  


AMR
      Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan, as amended, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the
      quarterly period ended June 30, 2005; the successor to the AMR Corporation
      1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference
      to Exhibit 10.9 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 1996, and the AMR Corporation 1999 Directors’ Stock Appreciation
      Rights Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  1999.









10.4  


First
      Amendment to AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan, dated as
      of January 1, 2005.




















10.5  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed on July
      19, 2002.









10.6  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 16, 2002 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.27 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2002.









10.7  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.8  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.9  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.8 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2005.









10.10  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2006.









10.11  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.10 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.12  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and John
      W. Bachmann.









10.13  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of April 30, 2003 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  2003.









10.14  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.15  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.17 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.16  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      David L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.17  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      David L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.18  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and David
      L. Boren, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.19  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and David
      L. Boren















10.20  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of February 19, 1998, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.15 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1997.









10.21  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 13, 1999, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.19 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1998.









10.22  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2000, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1999.









10.23  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 22, 2001, between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2000.









10.24  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed
      on July 19, 2002.









10.25  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 13, 2002 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.28 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.









10.26  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.20 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.27  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.28  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.29  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 21, 2006 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.33  to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 2006.









10.30  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 21, 2006 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.34  to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 2006.









10.31  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.28  to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
      31, 2007.









10.32  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Armando M. Codina.









10.33  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of April 30, 2003 between AMR and Ann M.
      Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  2003.









10.34  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.24 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.















10.35  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.31 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.36  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.37  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.44 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2006.




 




10.38  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.40 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.39  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Ann
      M. Korologos.









10.40  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of April 30, 2003 between AMR and Michael
      A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31,
  2003.









10.41  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.42  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.34 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.43  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.41 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.44  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.45  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.46 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007









10.46  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Michael A. Miles.









10.47  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 19, 2001, between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2000.









10.48  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed
      on July 19, 2002.









10.49  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2002 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.















10.50  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.30 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.51  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.39 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.52  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.47 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.53  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.56 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.54  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.54 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.55  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Philip J. Purcell.









10.56  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.48 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2005.









10.57  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.58 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2006.









10.58  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.57 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.59  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Ray
      M. Robinson.









10.60  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of July 16, 1997, between AMR and Judith
      Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.22 to AMR’s report on Form
      10-K for the year ended December 31,
1997.









10.61  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of February 19, 1998, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1997.









10.62  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 7, 1999, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.30 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1998.









10.63  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2000, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.29 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  1999.









10.64  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 22, 2001, between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.25 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2000.
























10.65  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed on July
      19, 2002.









10.66  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 20, 2002 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.









10.67  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.68  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.53 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.69  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.64 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.70  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.69 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.71  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.69 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.72  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Judith Rodin.









10.73  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.65 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.74  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.66 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.75  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.72 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.76  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.73 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2007.









10.77  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Matthew K. Rose.









10.78  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 18, 2001 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2002, as filed
      on July 19, 2002.









10.79  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 18, 2002 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.23 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2002.















10.80  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 12, 2004 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.45 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.81  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 8, 2004 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.57 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.82  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2005 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.71 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2005.









10.83  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of November 29, 2006 between AMR and
      Roger T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.78 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2006.









10.84  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2007 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.80 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2007.









10.85  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Roger
      T. Staubach.









10.86  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 15, 2008 between AMR and Rajat
      K. Gupta, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.81 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2008.









10.87  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and Rajat
      K. Gupta.









10.88  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of January 15, 2008 between AMR and
      Alberto Ibargüen,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.82 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31, 2008.









10.89  


Deferred
      Compensation Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2008 between AMR and
      Alberto Ibargüen.









10.90  


Current
      form of Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as
      amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.64 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.









10.91  


Current
      form of Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock Incentive
      Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s report on Form
      10-K for the year ended December 31,
2003.









10.92  


Current
      form of 2003 Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive
      Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended September 30,
      2003.









10.93  


Current
      form of 2004 Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive
      Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.64 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.94  


Current
      form of 2005 Stock Option Agreement under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive
      Plan, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
      2005.























10.95  


Current
      form of 2003 Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock
      Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.96  


Current
      form of 2004 Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock
      Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.66 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2004.









10.97  


Current
      form of 2005 Stock Option Agreement under the 2003 Employee Stock
      Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2005.









10.98  


Current
      form of Amendment of Stock Option Agreements under the 1998 Long-Term
      Incentive Plan to Add Stock Appreciation Rights, incorporated by reference
      to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended September 30,
      2006.









10.99  


Current
      form of Amendment of Stock Option Agreements under the 1998 Long-Term
      Incentive Plan to Add Stock Appreciation Rights, incorporated by reference
      to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended September 30,
      2006.









10.100  


Career
      Performance Shares, Deferred Stock Award Agreement between AMR Corporation
      and Gerard J. Arpey dated as of July 25, 2005, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.6 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly
      period ended June 30, 2005.









10.101  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Corporate
      Officers under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.41 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.102  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for
      non-officers under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.42 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.103  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Senior
      Officers under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.42(a) to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 1998.









10.104  


Current
      form of Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for Employees
      under the AMR 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, incorporated by reference to
      Exhibit 10.44 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      1999.









10.105  


Form
      of amendment to Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for
      Employees and Senior Officers dated as of January 1,
  2005.









10.106  


Form
      of amendment to Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement for
      Employees and Senior Officers dated as of January 1,
  2005.









10.107  


Current
      form of 2006 Deferred Share Award Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2006.









10.108  


Current
      form of 2007 Deferred Share Award Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to AMR’s report
      on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2007









10.109  


Current
      form of 2008 Deferred Share Award Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.2 to AMR’s report
      on Form 8-K on May 22, 2008.















10.110  


Current
      form of Stock Appreciation Right Agreement under the 1998 Long Term
      Incentive Plan, as Amended (with awards to executive officers noted),
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for
      the quarterly period ended June 30,
2006.









10.111  


Current
      form of Stock Appreciation Right Agreement under the 1998 Long Term
      Incentive Plan, as Amended (with awards to executive officers noted),
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for
      the quarterly period ended June 30,
2007.









10.112  


Current
      form of Stock Appreciation Right Agreement under the 1998 Long Term
      Incentive Plan, as Amended (with awards to executive officers noted),
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.1 to AMR’s report on Form 8-K for
      on May 22, 2008.









10.113  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Gerard J. Arpey, dated May 21, 1998, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.61 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.114  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Peter M. Bowler, dated May 21, 1998, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.63 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 1998.









10.115  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Daniel P. Garton, dated May 21, 1998, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.66 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 1998.









10.116  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Monte E. Ford, dated November 15, 2000, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.74 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2000.









10.117  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Henry C. Joyner, dated January 19, 2000,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.74 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31,
1999.









10.118  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and William K. Ris, Jr., dated October 20, 1999,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.79 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31,
1999.









10.119  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Gary F. Kennedy dated February 3, 2003, incorporated
      by reference to Exhibit 10.55 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2002.









10.120  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Robert W. Reding dated May 20, 2003, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.71 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 2003.









10.121  


Employment
      agreement between AMR, American Airlines and William K. Ris, Jr. dated
      November 11, 1999, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.73 to AMR’s
      report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
  2003.









10.122  


Employment
      agreement between AMR, American Airlines and Robert W. Reding dated May
      21, 2003, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.94 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2004.






 



 






 



 




10.123  


Amended
      and Restated Executive Termination Benefits Agreement between AMR,
      American Airlines and Jeffrey J. Brundage dated April 1, 2004,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for
      the quarterly period ended March 31,
2004.









10.124  


Form
      of Amendment to Executive Termination Benefits Agreement dated as of
      January 1, 2005.









10.125  


Employment
      agreement between AMR, American Airlines and Thomas W. Horton dated March
      29, 2006, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s current
      report on Form 8-K dated March 31,
2006.









10.126  


Amendment
      of employment agreement between AMR, American Airlines and Thomas W.
      Horton dated July 15, 2008, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to
      AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
      2008.









10.127  


Supplemental
      Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc., as
      amended and restated as of January 1,
2005.









10.128  


Trust
      Agreement Under Supplemental Retirement Program for Officers of American
      Airlines, Inc., as amended and restated as of June 1,
  2007.









10.129  


Trust
      Agreement Under Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of
      American Airlines, Inc. Participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, as amended and
      restated as of June 1, 2007.









10.130  


Aircraft
      Purchase Agreement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated October 31, 1997, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.48 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      1997.  Confidential treatment was granted as to a portion of
      this document.









10.131  


Letter
      Agreement dated November 17, 2004 and Purchase Agreement Supplements dated
      January 11, 2005 between the Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc.,
      incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.99 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K
      for the year ended December 31, 2004.  Confidential treatment
      was granted as to a portion of these
agreements.









10.132  


Letter
      Agreement between the Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc. dated May
      5, 2005, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to AMR’s report on Form
      10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2005.  Confidential
      treatment was granted as to a portion of this
  agreement.









10.133  


Aircraft
      Purchase Agreement by and between AMR Eagle Holding Corporation and
      Bombardier Inc., dated January 31, 1998, incorporated by reference to
      Exhibit 10.49 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      1997.  Confidential treatment was granted as to a portion of
      this agreement.









10.134  


Amended
      and Restated Credit Agreement dated March 27, 2006, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10 to AMR’s report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly
      period ended March 31, 2006.









10.135  


AMR
      Corporation Procedures for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees (an
      amendment and restatement of the Directors Stock Equivalent Purchase
      Plan), as amended and restated as of January 1,
  2005.









10.136  


Current
      form of Deferred Share Award Agreement as Amended and Restated March 29,
      2006 (with awards to executive officers noted), incorporated by reference
      to Exhibit 99.7 to AMR’s current report on Form 8-K dated March 31,
      2006.




 





 




10.137  


2009
      Annual Incentive Plan for American, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      99.1 to AMR’s current report on Form 8-K dated February 3,
      2009.




 




10.138  


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing Company,
      dated as of October 15, 2008. Portions of this Exhibit have been omitted
      and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant
      to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2 of the Securities and
      Exchange Act of 1934, as amended incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.29 to American Airlines, Inc's report on Form 10-K for the year ended
      December 31, 2008.




 




10.139  


Form
      of 2006-2008 Performance Share Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted) and 2006-2008 Performance Share Plan for Officers and Key
      Employees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2006.









10.140  


Form
      of 2007-2009 Performance Share Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), and 2007-2009 Performance Share Plan for Officers and Key
      Employees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to AMR’s report on
      Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30,
  2007.









10.141  


Form
      of 2008-2010 Performance Share Agreement (with awards to executive
      officers noted), and 2008-2010 Performance Share Plan for Officers and Key
      Employees, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 99.3 to AMR’s current
      report on Form 8-K dated  May 22,
  2008.









10.142  


AMR
      Corporation 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as Amended and Restated as of
      January 1, 2005.









10.143  


Amendment
      of Stock Option Agreements Under the 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan to Add
      Stock Appreciation Rights, incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.132 to
      AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      2006.









10.144  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated August 17, 2007. Portions of this Exhibit have been omitted
      and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant
      to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2 of the Securities and
      Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by reference to Exhibit
      10.133 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
      2007.









10.145  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated November 20, 2007.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.134 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.









10.146  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated December 10, 2007.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.135 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.




 





















10.147  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated January 20, 2008.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.136 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.









10.148  


Purchase
      Agreement Supplement by and between American Airlines, Inc. and The Boeing
      Company, dated February 11, 2008.  Portions of this Exhibit have
      been omitted and filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
      Commission pursuant to a confidential treatment request under Rule 24b-2
      of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by
      reference to Exhibit 10.137 to AMR’s report on Form 10-K for the year
      ended December 31, 2007.









10.149  


AMR
      Corporation Amended and Restated Directors Pension Benefits Plan,
      effective as of January 1, 2005.









10.150  


Amended
      and Restated Air Transportation Plan for Non-Employee Directors of AMR
      Corporation, effective as of January 1,
2005.









10.151  


AMR
      Corporation 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan, as amended as of January
      1, 2005.









10.152  


First
      Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, dated as
      of January 1, 2005.










 
      


        
      12


Computation
      of ratio of earnings to fixed charges for the years ended December 31,
      2008, 2007, 2006, 2005 and 2004.









 
      


               
      21  


Significant
      subsidiaries of the registrant as of December 31,
  2008.




 





23  


Consent
      of Independent Registered Public Accounting
  Firm.









31.1  


Certification
      of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Rule
  13a-14(a).









31.2  


Certification
      of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Rule
  13a-14(a).









32  


Certification
      pursuant to Rule 13a-14(b) and section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
      2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of section 1350, chapter 63 of title 18,
      United States Code).







 



 






 



SIGNATURES

Pursuant
to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by
the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.


AMR
CORPORATION







By:


/s/  Gerard
      J. Arpey



 
      

Gerard
      J. Arpey



 
      

Chairman,
      President and Chief Executive Officer



 
      

(Principal
      Executive Officer)



 
      
 
      




Date: February
18, 2009



Pursuant
to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the
capacities and on the dates noted:







/s/  Gerard
      J. Arpey

 
      

/s/  Thomas
      W Horton




Gerard
      J. Arpey

 
      

Thomas
      W. Horton




Director,
      Chairman and Chief Executive Officer

 
      

Executive
      Vice President and Chief Financial Officer




(Principal
      Executive Officer)

 
      

(Principal
      Financial and Accounting
Officer)

















/s/  John
      W. Bachmann

 
      

/s/  Michael
      A. Miles




John
      W. Bachmann, Director

 
      

Michael
      A. Miles, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/  David
      L. Boren

 
      

/s/  Philip
      J. Purcell




David
      L. Boren, Director

 
      

Philip
      J. Purcell, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/  Armando
      M. Codina

 
      

/s/  Ray
      M. Robinson




Armando
      M. Codina, Director

 
      

Ray
      M. Robinson, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/
      Rajat K. Gupta

 
      

/s/  Judith
      Rodin




Rajat
      K. Gupta, Director

 
      

Judith
      Rodin, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/
      Alberto Ibargüen

 
      

/s/  Matthew
      K. Rose




Alberto
      Ibargüen,
      Director

 
      

Matthew
      K. Rose, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



/s/  Ann
      McLaughlin Korologos

 
      

/s/  Roger
      T. Staubach




Ann
      McLaughlin Korologos, Director

 
      

Roger
      T. Staubach, Director



 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



Date: February
      18, 2009

 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


























AMR
CORPORATION
Schedule
II - Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves
 (in
millions)




 

 
 
 
 
Balance
at
      beginning
 of year


 
 
 
Changes
      charged to statement of operations accounts


 
 
 
 
 
 
Payments


 
 
 
 
 
Write-offs
      (net of recoveries)


 
 
 
 
Sales,
retirements
and
      transfers


 
 
 
 
 
Balance
      at
      end
      
of
      year












 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Year
      ended December 31, 2008

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
obsolescence
      of
      
inventories


          $ 
      

424
 
 
$
101
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
(37
)
 
$
488
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
uncollectible
      
accounts

 
41
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Reserves
      for 
environmental
remediation
      costs

 
21
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
(5
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
18
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Year
      ended December 31, 2007

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for
obsolescence
      of 
inventories

        $
411
 
 
$
27
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
(14
)
 
$
424
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
uncollectible
      
accounts

 
45
 
 
 
(1
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
 
 
      


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Reserves
      for 
environmental
remediation
      costs

 
33
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(7
)
 
 
(5
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
21
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Year
      ended December 31, 2006

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
obsolescence
      of
      
inventories

          
      $
410
 
 
$
24
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
(23
)
 
$
411
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Allowance
      for 
uncollectible
      
accounts

 
60
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
(25
)
 
 
7
 
 
 
45
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      



Reserves
      for 
environmental
remediation
      costs

 
40
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
(9
)
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
33
 
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      










EX-10.4
2
ex104.htm
DIRECTORS UNIT INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex104.htm







FIRST
AMENDMENT
 
TO
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
2004
DIRECTORS UNIT INCENTIVE PLAN
 
THIS
FIRST AMENDMENT TO AMR CORPORATION 2004 DIRECTORS UNIT INCENTIVE PLAN, is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, by AMR Corporation (the
“Company”).
 
PREAMBLE
 
The
purposes of the AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan (the “Plan”)
are to enable AMR Corporation (the “Company”) to attract, retain and motivate
the best qualified directors and to enhance a long-term mutuality of interest
between the directors and stockholders of the Company by providing the directors
with an interest in the economic well-being of the Company as evidenced by the
price of the Company’s Common Stock.  Since the adoption of the Plan,
section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) has
been enacted and requires amendment of the Plan.  Such required
amendments are accomplished by adoption of this instrument.
 
AMENDMENTS
 
1.           Section
2(i) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“(i)           “Beneficiary”
shall mean a person designated by an Eligible Director who is or may be entitled
to a benefit under this Plan in the event of the death of the Eligible
Director.  If no Beneficiary is designated, or if the designated
Beneficiary is not then living, benefits will be paid to the Eligible Director’s
spouse, and if the spouse is not then living, to the Eligible Director’s
estate.  Each Eligible Director shall have the right to designate the
Beneficiary selected in writing.”
 
2.           Section
6(b) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Payment
shall not be accelerated to an earlier date, except in the case of early
termination of the Plan pursuant to Section 10(a) of the Plan.  For
purposes of this Section 6(b) in the event of death of the Eligible Director,
the Eligible Director shall be deemed to have ceased to be a member of the Board
as of the date of death.  An Eligible Director shall also be deemed to
have ceased to be a member of the Board at the end of the Eligible Director’s
term of office if the Eligible Director is not nominated or elected to another
term, or upon the date of resignation or removal from office, without continuing
in service as an employee or independent contractor of the Company or any
corporation owned in whole or in part by the Company.  In the event
that an Eligible Director continues in any such service, payment shall be
delayed until the former Eligible Director sustains a “separation from service”
as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
3.           Section
10(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“Any
payment on termination of the Plan shall be made only in accordance with
Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
4.           Except
as specifically amended herein, the Plan as heretofore in effect shall remain in
full force and effect.
 
This
First Amendment to AMR Corporation 2004 Directors Unit Incentive Plan is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, and is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 

 
By:                                                                           Its:  Corporate
Secretary
 

 

 

 

 

 
 




EX-10.12
3
ex1012.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - JOHN W BACHMANN

ex1012.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr. John
W. Bachmann
Edward
Jones
12555
Manchester Road
St.
Louis, Mo. 63131


Dear
John:
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to
Katherine Bachmann.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will
be made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary






Accepted
and agreed:

/s/
John W. Bachmann          

John W.
Bachmann


Date



EX-10.19
4
ex1019.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - DAVID L BOREN

ex1019.htm







 

December
4, 2007




Mr. David
L. Boren
Office of
the President
University
of Oklahoma
660
Parrington Oval, Room 110
Norman,
OK 73019

Dear
David:

This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director=s
fees in 2008.

1.           All
director=s
fees and retainers (AFees@)  payable
to you in connection with your service on the boards of directors (including
committees of such boards) of AMR Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for
the period January 1, 2008 through December 31, 2008 , will be deferred and paid
to you in accordance with this letter agreement.

2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Directors'
Stock Equivalent Purchase Plan, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit A
(the APlan@).

3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued in 2008 pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash
and paid to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent
Units by the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market
value”) during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and
any affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Molly
Boren.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.


 
 




 



 






 






If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.

Very
truly yours,

/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly


Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary


Accepted
and agreed:




__/s/ David L.
Boren_     _______
David L.
Boren


_December 6,
2007  __________
Date



EX-10.32
5
ex1032.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ARMANDO M CODINA

ex1032.htm








December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Armando M. Codina
Chairman
Flagler
Development Group
2855
Lejeune Road,  4th
Floor
Coral
Gables, FL 33134


Dear
Armando:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to
Margarita Codina.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will
be made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary



Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Armando M. Codina        
Armando
M. Codina




EX-10.39
6
ex1039.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ANN M KOROLOGOS

ex1039.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mrs. Ann
M. Korologos
3150
South Street, NW, Apt. 2A
Washington,
D.C. 20007

 
Dear
Ann:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Tom
Korologos.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Ann M. Korologos       
 
Ann M.
Korologos


Date



EX-10.46
7
ex1046.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - MICHAEL A MILES

ex1046.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Michael A. Miles
1350 Lake
Road
Lake
Forest, IL 60045

 
Dear
Mike:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Pamela
Miles.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Michael A. Miles       
Michael
A. Miles




EX-10.55
8
ex1055.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - PHILIP J PURCELL

ex1055.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Philip J. Purcell
227 West
Monroe Street
Suite
5045
Chicago,
IL 60606

 
Dear
Phil:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Anne
Purcell.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/
Kenneth W. Wimberly
 
Kenneth W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Philip J. Purcell       
Philip J.
Purcell




EX-10.59
9
ex1059.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - RAY M ROBINSON

ex1059.htm



 

December
4, 2008
 
Mr. Ray
M. Robinson
Citizens
Trust Bank
75
Piedmont Avenue
Atlanta,
GA 30303

Dear
Ray:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Arlane
Robinson.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/ Ray
M. Robinson
Ray M.
Robinson




EX-10.72
10
ex1072.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - JUDITH RODIN

ex1072.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Judith
Rodin, PhD.
President
The
Rockefeller Foundation
420 Fifth
Avenue
New York
NY  10018
 
Dear
Judith:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Pursuant
to the Procedures for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and
restated (a copy of which is attached as Exhibit A), interest will be accrued on
the amounts to be paid on a deferred basis pursuant to paragraph 1 above, from
the date such fees would otherwise have been paid to the date actually paid, at
the prime rate which JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. from time to time charges in New
York for 90-day loans to responsible commercial borrowers, such interest to be
compounded monthly.
 
3.           On
the 30th
business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation, and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the total amount
to be paid on a deferred basis; plus the aggregate amount of interest accrued
thereon will be paid to you in a lump sum distribution.  Payment
cannot be accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the amounts outlined in Paragraph 3 above shall be paid
to the Trustees under your Revocable Agreement of Trust, dated September 15,
1997, as amended February 20, 2004, Judith Rodin Settlor and
Trustee.  The payments contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

Very
truly yours,
 
 
/s/
Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary
 

 

 
Accepted
and agreed:
 


/s/
Judith Rodin

Judith
Rodin



EX-10.77
11
ex1077.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - MATTHEW K ROSE

ex1077.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Matthew K. Rose
Chairman
Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Corp.
2650 Lou
Menk Drive
Fort
Worth, TX  76131

 
Dear
Matt:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Lisa
Rose.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made on
the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/
Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Matthew K. Rose
Matthew
K. Rose

 



EX-10.85
12
ex1085.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ROGER T STAUBACH

ex1085.htm




December
4, 2008
 
Mr. Roger
T. Staubach
Executive
Chairman, Americas
Jones,
Lang, LaSalle Inc.
15601
Dallas Parkway
Suite
400
Addison,
TX 75001

Dear
Roger:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Marianne
Staubach.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be made
on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/ Roger
T. Staubach
Roger T.
Staubach




EX-10.87
13
ex1087.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - RAJAT K GUPTA

ex1087.htm




December
4, 2008
 
Rajat K.
Gupta
McKinsey
& Company, Inc.
3
Landmark Square
Suite
100, 21st
Floor
Stamford,
CT  06901

 
Dear
Rajat:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Anita
Mattoo Gupta.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph 4 will be
made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary




Accepted
and agreed:


/s/ Rajat
K. Gupta
Rajat K.
Gupta




EX-10.89
14
ex1089.htm
DEFERRED COMPENSATION AGREEMENT - ALBERTO IBARGUEN

ex1089.htm







December
4, 2008
 
Mr.
Alberto Ibargüen
John S.
& James L. Knight Foundation
200 S.
Biscayne Blvd., Suite 3300
Miami,
FL  33131-2349

Dear
Alberto:
 
This will
confirm the following agreement relating to the deferral of your director’s
retainers and fees for 2009.
 
1.           All
director’s fees and retainer (“Fees”) payable to you in connection with your
service on the boards of directors (including committees of such boards) of AMR
Corporation and American Airlines, Inc. for the period January 1, 2009 through
December 31, 2009, will be deferred and paid to you in accordance with this
letter agreement.
 
2.           Fees
will be converted to Stock Equivalent Units in accordance with the Procedures
for Deferral of Board Retainers and Fees, as amended and restated, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A (the “Plan”).
 
3.           On
the 30th business day after the date when you cease to be a Director of AMR
Corporation and any affiliates, and cease rendering services, the Stock
Equivalent Units accrued pursuant to the Plan will be converted to cash and paid
to you in a lump sum by multiplying the number of such Stock Equivalent Units by
the arithmetic mean of the high and the low of AMR stock (“fair market value”)
during the month when you ceased to be a Director of AMR Corporation and any
affiliates, and cease rendering services.  Payment cannot be
accelerated.
 
4.           In
the event of your death, the number of Stock Equivalent Units as of your date of
death will be multiplied by the fair market value of AMR stock during the
calendar month immediately preceding your death, and the amount paid to Alberto
Ibargüen Revocable Trust.  The payment contemplated by this paragraph
4 will be made on the 30th
business day following the date of your death.
 
If the
foregoing is satisfactory to you, please indicate by signing one of the
originals (two are enclosed) and returning it to me.
 

 

Very
truly yours,
 
/s/ Kenneth W. Wimberly
Kenneth
W. Wimberly
Corporate
Secretary





Accepted
and agreed:


/s/
Alberto Ibarguen
Alberto
Ibarguen




EX-10.105
15
ex10105.htm
CAREER EQUITY PROGRAM DEFERRED STOCK AWARD, AMENDED

ex10105.htm







AMENDMENT
TO
CAREER
EQUITY PROGRAM
DEFERRED STOCK AWARD
AGREEMENT(S)
 
This Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the
Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement(s) dated [INSERT DATE(S)] (as amended,
the “Agreement(s)”) is made this 17th day of November, 2008.
 
WHEREAS, AMR Corporation (the
“Corporation”) and [NAME] (the “Employee”),
employee number [EMPLOYEE
NUMBER], have previously entered into the Agreement(s);
 
WHEREAS, effective January 1, 2005, the
Agreement(s) became subject to certain requirements of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and the regulations and
other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to guidance issued
under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) may be amended on or before
December 31, 2008, to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the Code
and the regulations and other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation and the
Employee wish to amend such Agreement(s) to comply with the applicable
requirements of section 409A of the Code and the governing regulations and other
guidance issued thereunder;
 
NOW THEREFORE, in order to avoid
imposition of the penalties under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) are
hereby amended as follows:
 
1.           The
last sentence in the Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Grant of Award”, is
deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“To the
extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not vested (within the
meaning of section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”)) as of January 1, 2005 (“Post-409A Shares”), the vesting, payment and
deferral of such Post-409A Shares shall be made in accordance with the
provisions herein which specifically relate to Post-409A Shares.  Such
Post-409A Shares shall be comprised of the shares of Stock which the Employee
could not receive pursuant to the vesting schedule described herein by virtue of
a Normal Retirement or Early Retirement effective as of December 31,
2004.  For instance, if the Employee had attained age 57 as of
December 31, 2004, and could have retired (by virtue of an Early Retirement) at
that time, 9% of the shares of Stock covered by the Award would be treated as
Post-409A Shares.  Except as otherwise provided in the Section of the
Agreements entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, to the extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not
Post-409A Shares, the vesting, payment and deferral of such shares shall be made
in accordance with the applicable provisions herein, which do not otherwise
relate specifically to Post-409A Shares.”
 
2.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting
–Normal Retirement or Early Retirement”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this
Section; provided that the Employee’s Retirement or Early Retirement constitutes
a “separation from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or
successor guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the
Agreement entitled, “Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to the
Employee not later than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the Employee’s Retirement or
Early Retirement occurred.”
 
3.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Death or Disability”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment due to Disability, such
termination of employment constitutes a “separation from service” for purposes
of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor guidance
thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement entitled,
“Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares, which are payable upon the termination of
Employee’s employment due to Disability, shall be issued and delivered not later
than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year immediately following
the calendar year in which such termination occurred.”
 
4.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Termination Not for Cause”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment for reasons described in
this Section, the Employee’s termination of employment constitutes a “separation
from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement
entitled, “Section
409A Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the
Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to
the Employee in accordance with the preceding paragraph of this
Section.”
 
5.           The
Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, is deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“Vesting – Change in
Control.  In the event of a “Change in Control” (as defined in
the Corporation’s 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, that is in effect
as of December 31, 2008, and any successor thereto), shares under the Award
(i.e., all Post-409A
Shares and non-Post-409A Shares) shall vest in accordance with the 1998 Plan or
its successor.  Share certificates for the number of shares covered by
the vested portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall
be issued and delivered to the Employee not later than the 15th day of the third
month of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such
change in control occurred.”
 
6.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Elective
Deferrals”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Employee will not be permitted to make any change in the time
of payment of the portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A
Shares.”
 
7.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the first paragraph in the
Subsection of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Performance Return
Payments”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, for ROI measurement periods ending on or after January 1, 2005,
the Payment Date for a particular Performance Return Payment shall occur during
the calendar year immediately following the close of the last fiscal year of the
particular ROI measurement period that relates to such Performance Return
Payment.”
 
8.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the last paragraph in the
Subsection of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Performance Return
Payments”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Employee may not elect to defer receipt of a Performance
Return Payment that relates to a ROI measurement period ending on or after
January 1, 2005.”
 
9.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Subsection of the
Agreement(s) entitled, “Dividend
Equivalents”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, dividend equivalent payments occurring on or after January 1,
2005, shall automatically be deferred and treated as additional shares of
Deferred Stock, subject to the terms and conditions that apply to the related
shares of Deferred Stock with respect to which such dividend equivalents were
originally payable.”
 
10.           The
following new Section is added as the last Section of the Agreement(s) to read
as follows:
 
“Section 409A
Compliance.  The Agreement, as amended, is intended to be
exempt from and/or comply with the requirements (and not otherwise be subject to
the interest and penalty taxes of) section 409A of the Code and the regulations
and other guidance issued thereunder, and shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with that intent.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the
event there is a failure to comply with section 409A of the Code, the Board
shall have the discretion to accelerate the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares, but only to the extent of the amount required to be included in income
as a result of such failure.  Amendments to the Agreement may be made
by the Corporation, without the Employee’s consent, in order to ensure
compliance with section 409A of the Code and the regulations and other guidance
issued thereunder.
 
Notwithstanding
any provision herein to the contrary, if the Employee is a “specified employee”
pursuant to Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or successor guidance thereto, any
payment of Post-409A Shares on account of his/her Normal Retirement, Early
Retirement or involuntary termination not for Cause shall be delayed until the
earlier of: (i) the six-month anniversary of the date of separation from
employment due to Normal Retirement, Early Retirement or involuntary termination
not for Cause, or (ii) the date of the Employee’s death.”
 
11.           The
following new sentence is added at the end of the first paragraph of Schedule A
of the Agreement(s) to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, effective October 3, 2004, the Chairman or Committee, as the case
may be, only shall change such percentage prior to the commencement of a
particular ROI measurement period and such change shall apply on a prospective
basis to such ROI measurement period and other ROI measurement periods
commencing thereafter.”
 
12.           The
first sentence of the second paragraph of Schedule A of the Agreement(s) is
amended by deleting said sentence in its entirety and substituted in its place
is the following:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, effective January 1, 2005, the price of the shares described in
this paragraph will be equal to the “Fair Market Value” (as defined in the
Corporation’s 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, that is in effect as of
December 31, 2008, and any successor thereto) of the Stock as of the date the
ROI is calculated.”
 
13.           Except
as amended by the Amendment, the remaining terms and provisions of the
Agreement(s) shall remain in full force and effect.  Nothing in the
Amendment shall be deemed to cause a termination of the
Agreement(s).
 
IN
WITNESS HEREOF, the Employee and the Corporation have caused Amendment to be
executed as of the date first written above.
 
EMPLOYEE                                                                                     AMR
CORPORATION
 

 

 

[NAME]                                                                                            Kenneth
W. Wimberly
  Corporate
Secretary



EX-10.106
16
ex10106.htm
CAREER EQUITY PROGRAM DEFERRED STOCK AWARD, AMENDED

ex10106.htm











 
      


AMENDMENT
      TO




CAREER
EQUITY PROGRAM
DEFERRED STOCK AWARD
AGREEMENT(S)
 
This Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the
Career Equity Program Deferred Stock Award Agreement(s) dated [INSERT DATE(S)] (as amended,
the “Agreement(s)”) is made this 17th day of November, 2008.
 
WHEREAS, AMR Corporation (the
“Corporation”) and [NAME] (the “Employee”),
employee number [EMPLOYEE
NUMBER], have previously entered into the Agreement(s);
 
WHEREAS, effective January 1, 2005, the
Agreement(s) became subject to certain requirements of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and the regulations and
other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to guidance issued
under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) must be amended on or before
December 31, 2008, to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the Code
and the regulations and other guidance issued thereunder;
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation and the
Employee wish to amend such Agreement(s) to comply with the applicable
requirements of section 409A of the Code and the governing regulations and other
guidance issued thereunder;
 
NOW THEREFORE, in order to avoid
imposition of the penalties under section 409A of the Code, the Agreement(s) are
hereby amended as follows:
 
1.           The
last sentence in the Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Grant of Award”, is
deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“To the
extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not vested (within the
meaning of section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
“Code”)) as of January 1, 2005 (“Post-409A Shares”), the vesting, payment and
deferral of such Post-409A Shares shall be made in accordance with the
provisions herein which specifically relate to Post-409A Shares.  Such
Post-409A Shares shall be comprised of the shares of Stock which the Employee
could not receive pursuant to the vesting schedule described herein by virtue of
a Normal Retirement or Early Retirement effective as of December 31,
2004.  For instance, if the Employee had attained age 57 as of
December 31, 2004, and could have retired (by virtue of an Early Retirement) at
that time, 9% of the shares of Stock covered by the Award would be treated as
Post-409A Shares.  Except as otherwise provided in the Section of the
Agreements entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, to the extent the shares of Stock covered by the Award are not
Post-409A Shares, the vesting, payment and deferral of such shares shall be made
in accordance with the applicable provisions herein, which do not otherwise
relate specifically to Post-409A Shares.”
 
2.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting
–Normal Retirement or Early Retirement”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this
Section; provided that the Employee’s Retirement or Early Retirement constitutes
a “separation from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or
successor guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the
Agreement entitled, “Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to the
Employee not later than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year
immediately following the calendar year in which the Employee’s Retirement or
Early Retirement occurred.”
 
3.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Death or Disability”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment due to Disability, such
termination of employment constitutes a “separation from service” for purposes
of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor guidance
thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement entitled,
“Section 409A
Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the Employee’s
Award comprised of Post-409A Shares, which are payable upon the termination of
Employee’s employment due to Disability, shall be issued and delivered not later
than the 15th day of the third month of the calendar year immediately following
the calendar year in which such termination occurred.”
 
4.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Vesting –
Termination Not for Cause”, to read as follows:
 
“The
portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall become
vested in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph of this
Section; provided that, with respect to the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares upon the termination of Employee’s employment for reasons described in
this Section, the Employee’s termination of employment constitutes a “separation
from service” for purposes of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.  Except as provided in the Section of the Agreement
entitled, “Section
409A Compliance”, share certificates for the vested portion of the
Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall be issued and delivered to
the Employee in accordance with the preceding paragraph of this
Section.”
 
5.           The
Section of the Agreement(s) entitled, “Vesting – Change in
Control”, is deleted in its entirety and substituted in its place is the
following:
 
“Vesting – Change in
Control.  In the event of a “Change in Control” (as defined in
the Corporation’s 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, that is in effect
as of December 31, 2008, and any successor thereto), shares under the Award
(i.e., all Post-409A
Shares and non-Post-409A Shares) shall vest in accordance with the 1998 Plan or
its successor.  Share certificates for the number of shares covered by
the vested portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A Shares shall
be issued and delivered to the Employee not later than the 15th day of the third
month of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such
change in control occurred.”
 
6.           The
following new paragraph is added at the end of the Section of the Agreement(s)
entitled, “Elective
Deferrals”, to read as follows:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Employee will not be permitted to make any change in the time
of payment of the portion of the Employee’s Award comprised of Post-409A
Shares.”
 
7.           The
following new Section is added as the last Section of the Agreement(s) to read
as follows:
 
“Section 409A
Compliance.  The Agreement, as amended, is intended to be
exempt from and/or comply with the requirements (and not otherwise be subject to
the interest and penalty taxes of) section 409A of the Code and the regulations
and other guidance issued thereunder, and shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with that intent.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the
event there is a failure to comply with section 409A of the Code, the Board
shall have the discretion to accelerate the issuance and delivery of Post-409A
Shares, but only to the extent of the amount required to be included in income
as a result of such failure.  Amendments to the Agreement may be made
by the Corporation, without the Employee’s consent, in order to ensure
compliance with section 409A of the Code and the regulations and other guidance
issued thereunder.
 
Notwithstanding
any provision herein to the contrary, if the Employee is a “specified employee”
in the year of payment pursuant to Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or successor
guidance thereto, any payment of Post-409A Shares on account of his/her Normal
Retirement, Early Retirement or involuntary termination not for Cause shall be
delayed until the first business day after the earlier of: (i) the six-month
anniversary of the date of separation from employment due to Normal Retirement,
Early Retirement or involuntary termination not for Cause, or (ii) the date of
the Employee’s death.”
 
8.           Except
as amended by the Amendment, the remaining terms and provisions of the
Agreement(s) shall remain in full force and effect.  Nothing in the
Amendment shall be deemed to cause a termination of the
Agreement(s).
 
IN
WITNESS HEREOF, the Employee and the Corporation have caused Amendment to be
executed as of the date first written above.
 
EMPLOYEE                                                                                     AMR
CORPORATION
 

 

 

                                                                                      Kenneth
W. Wimberly




EX-10.124
17
ex10124.htm
EXECUTIVE TERMINATION BENEFITS AGREEMENT, AMENDED

ex10124.htm







AMENDMENT
TO
 
EXECUTIVE
TERMINATION BENEFITS AGREEMENT
 
THIS
AMENDMENT TO EXECUTIVE TERMINATION BENEFITS AGREEMENT (the “Amendment”), dated
as of the 17th day of November, 2008, is by and between AMR CORPORATION, a
Delaware corporation, AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC., a Delaware corporation
(collectively, and either of, the “Company”), and  (the
“Executive”).
 
W I T N E
S S E T H:
 
WHEREAS,
the Company and the Executive have heretofore entered into an Executive
Termination Benefits Agreement, including any amendments thereto (the
“Agreement”), addressing issues related to possible Change in Control;
and
 
WHEREAS,
subsequent to the execution of the Agreement, section 409A of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), has been enacted and requires
amendment of the Agreement, which is intended to be accomplished through the
execution of this Amendment, which is effective as of January 1,
2005;
 
NOW
THEREFORE, the Company and the Executive agree that the Agreement is hereby
amended as follows:
 
1.          Section
1 of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following language,
at the end thereof:
 
Notwithstanding
the above, a Change in Control shall be deemed to have occurred only if the
event is also a change in ownership of the Company, or change in effective
control of the Company, or change in ownership of a substantial portion of the
Company’s assets, in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)
or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the specified
percentages in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii) or
successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
2.          Section
3 of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“No
termination of employment shall be deemed to have occurred under this Agreement
unless and until such termination of employment or separation from employment
constitutes a “separation from service” under Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or
successor guidance thereto.”
 
3.          Section
4(a) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence, at the end thereof:
 
“This
payment is subject to section 409A of the Code and to the payment delay
provision of Section 4(j), with respect to a “specified employee” as described
in section 409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code and Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or
successor guidance thereto.”
 
4.           Section
4(b) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the deletion of all language
following the first sentence thereof and substituting in lieu thereof the
following language:
 
“The
Employee Benefits subject to this Section 4(b) are governed by terms of the
applicable Employee Benefit plans not in conflict with this Section 4(b), may
not be liquidated or exchanged for any other benefit, and the amount of any such
benefits provided in one taxable year of the Executive shall not affect the
amount payable in any subsequent taxable year of the Executive.  The
Company will pay the cost of such Employee Benefits, some portion or all of
which may be taxable to the Executive, together with an additional amount such
that after payment by the Executive, or his dependents or beneficiaries, as the
case may be, of all taxes that may be imposed on the recipient of such Employee
Benefits, the recipient retains an amount equal to such taxes.  Any
amount paid as a cash reimbursement shall be paid not later than the last day of
the taxable year of the Executive following the taxable year of the Executive in
which the expense was incurred.  Any tax reimbursement under this
Section 4(b) must be paid not later than the end of the taxable year of the
Executive following the taxable year of the Executive in which the Executive
paid the relevant taxes.  The benefits or cost thereof payable under
the applicable Employee Benefit plans will be reduced to the extent comparable
welfare benefits are actually received by the Executive from another employer
during the Continuation Period (i.e. Company coverage shall be “secondary”) and
any such benefits actually received by the Executive shall be reported by the
Executive to the Company.”
 
5.          Section
4(c) of the Agreement is hereby amended and restated in the entirety, to provide
as follows:
 
“Retirement
Benefits
 
If the
Executive is not completely vested in the Executive's currently accrued benefits
under the Company's applicable Retirement Benefit Plan and Supplemental
Executive Retirement Plan (“SERP”) in effect as of the date of Change in Control
(collectively, the “Plans”), regardless of the Executive’s actual vesting
service credit thereunder, an amount shall be payable under this Section
4(c).  In addition to such amount, the Executive shall be deemed to
earn service credit for benefit calculation purposes under the SERP for the
Continuation Period described in Section 4(b).  The benefits to be
paid pursuant to the SERP shall be calculated as though the Executive's
compensation rate for each of the 5 years immediately preceding his retirement
equaled the sum of Base Pay plus Incentive Pay. Any benefits payable pursuant to
this Section 4(c) that are not payable out of the Plans for any reason
(including but not limited to any applicable benefit limitations under the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended, or any restrictions
relating to the qualification of the Company's applicable Retirement Benefit
Plan under section 401(a) of the Code), shall be paid directly by the Company
out of its general assets.  Any amount payable under this Section 4(c)
that is not paid under the Plans due to the fact the Participant is not fully
vested will be calculated as required under the SERP for payment of SERP
benefits (including calculation, time and form of payment).  If the
Executive is a “specified employee”, as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-1(i) or successor guidance thereto, on the date of the Executive’s
separation from employment, payment of the amount described in this Section 4(c)
shall be subject to Section 4(j).”
 
6.          Section
4(d) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the by the addition of the following
two sentences, at the end thereof:
 
“Payment
under this Section 4(d) for expenses shall be made not later than the last day
of the taxable year of the Executive following the taxable year of the Executive
in which the expenses were incurred.  Payments for tax reimbursement
shall be made not later than the end of the first taxable year of the Executive
following the year in which the tax payment was made.”
 
7.          Section
4(e) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence, at the end thereof:
 
“Payment
for such services will be made not later than the end of the taxable year of the
Executive following the taxable year of the Executive in which the expenses were
incurred.”
 
8.          Section
4(f)(ii) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the insertion of the words “or
the Company’s 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan (or any successor plan)”
following the reference to the “Company’s 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan (or any
successor plan).”
 
9.          Section
4(h)(i) is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at the end
thereof:
 
“The
flight privileges subject to this Section 4(h)(i) are governed by the terms of
the applicable flight privilege rules of the Company not in conflict with this
Section 4(h)(i), may not be liquidated or exchanged for any other benefit, and
the amount of any such benefits provided in one taxable year of the Executive
shall not affect the amount payable in any subsequent taxable year of the
Executive.  Any amount paid as a cash reimbursement shall be paid not
later than the last day of the taxable year of the Executive following the
taxable year of the Executive in which the expense was incurred.”
 
10.          Section
4(h)(iii) is amended by the addition of the following sentence, at the end
thereof:
 
“Such
payment shall be made within 75 days of the date of employment separation,
subject to Section 4(j) to the extent applicable.”
 
11.          Section
4(i) of the Agreement is amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“Payments
under this Section 4(i) must be made within 75 days of the end of the calendar
year in which the Executive’s termination of employment occurred, subject to
Section 4(j) to the extent applicable; provided that this Section 4(i) shall not
be effective to the extent it would result in impermissible acceleration of any
amounts subject to section 409A of the Code.”
 
12.          Section
4(j) is hereby amended and restated in the entirety, to provide as
follows:
 
“(j)           Time of Payment of Certain
Benefits.
 
Payment
of amounts under Sections 4(a), 4(c), 4(h)(iii), and 4(i) shall be made in a
single lump sum within 75 days following the Executive’s separation from
employment, and in any event not later than 75 days after the end of the taxable
year of the Executive in which the separation from employment shall occur;
provided that if the Executive is a “specified employee”, as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-1(i) or successor guidance thereto, as of the date of
termination from employment, any such payments to the extent subject to section
409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code, shall not be made until the first business day
following the date of the 6-month anniversary of the Executive’s separation from
employment.”
 
13.          The
third sentence of Section 5(b) of the Agreement is hereby amended by deletion of
the period at the end thereof and insertion of the following language, at the
end thereof:
 
“and in
any event not later than the end of the taxable year of the Executive following
the taxable year of the Executive in which payment of the relevant tax is
made.”
 
14.          Section
5(e) of the Agreement is hereby amended by deletion of the period at the end
thereof and insertion of the following language, at the end
thereof:
 
“and in
any event not later than the end of the taxable year of the Executive following
the taxable year of the Executive in which payment of the relevant tax is
made.”
 
15.          The
final three sentences of Section 5(h) of the Agreement are hereby deleted in
their entirety and are replaced by the following two sentences:
 
“In the
event that any payment or benefit intended to be provided under this Agreement
or otherwise is required to be reduced pursuant to this Section 5(h), the
severance payment under Section 4(a) shall be the payment subject to such
deduction.  If further reduction is required, stock based compensation
payments shall be subject to such reduction.”
 
16.          Section
7(b) of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following
language, at the end thereof:
 
“In the
event the Executive’s employment is terminated, any payment by the Company or
any such trust shall be made pursuant to this Section 7(b) within 75 days
following the date of the Executive’s separation from employment.  No
such transfer to a trust shall be made to the extent it shall trigger the excise
tax under section 409A(b)(3) or (4) of the Code.”
 
17.          Section
8 of the Agreement is amended by the addition of a new Section 8(c), at the end
thereof:
 
“(c)           The
Executive and the Company shall cooperate to assure that payments made under
this Agreement do not trigger the excise tax penalties of section 409A of the
Code, and, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, if any
payment under this Agreement to a “specified employee”, as described in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-1(k) or successor guidance thereto shall constitute “deferred
compensation” as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(b) or successor
guidance thereto, as determined by counsel to the Company, such payment shall be
deferred until the first day after the 6 month anniversary of the date of the
Executive’s separation from employment, except for payments described in Section
4(b), 4(d), 4(e) and 4(h)(i).”
 
18.          Section
17 of the Agreement is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“The
provisions of this Agreement specifying payment dates that differ from
applicable dates in the Agreement prior to its amendment shall be deemed to
constitute a change in time of payment and/or method of payment as permitted
under Internal Revenue Service 2006-79 as revised by Internal Revenue Service
Notice 2007-86 and shall be interpreted consistently with such guidance,
including the requirement that it is not applicable to a payment due in the
current taxable year of such change.”
 
19.          Except
as amended hereby, the Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect.  This Amendment is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this Amendment be executed and
delivered as of the day and year first above set forth.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           
 

 
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.
 
By:           
Its:           
 

Executive
 

 



EX-10.127
18
ex10127.htm
SUPPLEMENTAL EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM FOR OFFICERS, AMENDED

ex10127.htm







 
 
THE
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM (SERP) FOR OFFICERS
OF
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

AND
THE

SERP
SUMMARY PLAN DESCRIPTION

AS
AMENDED AND RESTATED


















 



 






 



THE
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM (SERP) FOR OFFICERS
OF
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

AND
THE

SERP
SUMMARY PLAN DESCRIPTION

AS
AMENDED AND RESTATED

TABLE OF
CONTENTS

Page

 




ARTICLE
      I


NAME
      AND PURPOSE OF THE PLAN 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




ARTICLE
      II


DEFINITIONS
      AND CONSTRUCTION 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      IIIELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      IV BENEFITS IN CONNECTION WITH THE BASE DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      V CONTRIBUTIONS AND EARNINGS CREDITS IN CONNECTION WITH THE $UPER $AVER
      PLUS PLAN[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      VIPAYMENT OF BENEFITS[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      VIIAMENDMENT AND TERMINATION[INSERT
      PAGE NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      VIIIGENERAL CONDITIONS[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      IXFUNDING[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XTRUST[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIERISA RIGHTS[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIICLAIMS PROCEDURES[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIIIFINALITY OF DECISIONS OR ACTS[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 




 
      


ARTICLE
      XIV GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR PLAN[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]







 



 






 




ARTICLE
I
NAME
AND PURPOSE OF THE PLAN 

 
Section
1.1            Name and Purpose of the
Plan.
 
  This
Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
Inc. (the “Plan”) provides supplemental retirement benefits to selected officers
of American Airlines, Inc.  It is amended and restated to comply with
section 409A of the Code.  Prior to January 1, 2001, the supplemental
benefits provided under this Plan consisted only of supplemental retirement
benefits in excess of the maximum pension benefits payable under a Participant's
Base Defined Benefit Plan and a supplemental retirement benefit based on a
Participant's Incentive Compensation and Performance Returns.  These
continuing benefits are described in Article IV of the
Plan.  Effective January 1, 2001, certain Participants, who
participate in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, either because they elected to forego
participation in a Base Defined Benefit Plan, or because they were not eligible
to elect to participate in a Base Defined Benefit Plan, became eligible to
receive benefits under Article V of the Plan.
 

Effective
October 15, 2002, the Plan was amended and restated in the entirety to provide
for irrevocable funding of certain benefits through the Trust Agreement under
the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
Inc.  This irrevocable trust funds certain benefits under Article IV
of the Plan.  The Trust Agreement under Supplemental Executive
Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc. Participating in the
$uper $aver Plus Plan was established and funded on September 15,
2005.  This irrevocable trust funds certain benefits under Article V
of the Plan.  Since the most recent amendment of the Plan, section
409A of the Code has been enacted and requires further amendment of the
Plan.  Accordingly, the Plan is hereby amended and restated in the
entirety effective as of January 1, 2005, except as otherwise provided
herein.

ARTICLE
II
DEFINITIONS
AND CONSTRUCTION

 
Section
2.1            Definitions.  Throughout
this Plan, certain defined terms are used which are identified by initial
capitalization.  Such terms are defined in this Section 2.1, unless
the context in which such terms are used clearly provides
otherwise.
 
 
(a) Act.  The
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
 
 
(b) Active Funding
Participant.  A Participant who currently performs active
duties of employment while a Participant pursuant to Section 3.1 who is vested
in a Funded Accrued Benefit under this Plan.
 
 
(c) AMR.  AMR
Corporation, and any successor thereto.
 
 
(d) Annual Defined Benefit
Retirement Benefit.  The amount determined by subtracting the
Base Defined Benefit Plan Benefit from the greatest of (i) the Base Plan Social
Security Offset Benefit, (ii) the Final Average Earnings Benefit, or (iii) the
Basic Benefit.  If the Base Defined Benefit Plan of a Participant is
the American Airlines, Inc. Pilot Retirement Benefit Program, the Annual Defined
Benefit Retirement Benefit shall be the amount determined by subtracting the
Base Defined Benefit Plan Benefit from the amount that would have been payable
under the Base Defined Benefit Plan in the absence of the Base Defined Benefit
Plan limits on compensation and benefits under the Code, plus the Supplemental
Incentive Compensation Retirement Benefit and the Supplemental Performance
Return Retirement Benefit (and for such purposes variable benefits shall be
disregarded).  In determining the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement
Benefit under this Plan, any additional pension service or age credit which the
Company and/or the Plan is required to provide pursuant to a separate
contractual agreement or a employment representation shall be added to Credited
Service or age in the determination of the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement
Benefit under this Plan, but not added as service or age to be credited under
the applicable Base Defined Benefit Plan.
 
 
(e) Average Incentive
Compensation.  An amount calculated as follows:
 
 
(1) The sum
of a Participant's four highest annual Incentive Compensation awards (or the sum
of all such awards if the Participant has fewer than four such awards) paid to a
Participant during the time period beginning on or after January 1, 1985, and
ending on the first to occur of:
 
 
(A) the
Participant's actual retirement under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, or under
$uper $aver if the Participant is not participating in a Base Defined Benefit
Plan,
 
 
(B) the date
of the Participant's death, or
 
 




(C)  


the
      date of the Participant’s
retirement.




 
 
If a
Participant is credited with less than a full year of Credited Service as a
Participant in any year in which Incentive Compensation is paid, that portion of
the Participant's Incentive Compensation that is taken into account will be
prorated based on the Credited Service earned by the Participant for such
year.
 
 
(2) Divide
the sum determined in (1) above, by four (or by the number of such awards if the
Participant has fewer than four such awards).
 
 
(f) Average Performance
Return.  An amount calculated as follows:
 
 
(1) The sum
of a Participant's four highest annual Performance Return awards (or the sum of
all such awards if the Participant has fewer than four such awards) paid to the
Participant during the Participant's career, and ending on the first to occur
of:
 
 
(A) the
Participant's actual retirement under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, or under
$uper $aver if the Participant is not participating in a Base Defined Benefit
Plan,
 
 
(B) the date
of the Participant's death, or
 
 




(C)  


the
      date of the Participant’s
retirement.




 
 
(2) Divide
the sum determined in (1) above, by four (or by the number of such awards if the
Participant has fewer than four such awards).
 
 
(g) Base Defined Benefit
Plan.  The defined benefit retirement benefit plan (or plans)
of the Company which qualifies under section 401 of the Code and under which
certain Participants covered under this Plan are eligible to receive
benefits.
 
 
(h) Base Defined Benefit Plan
Benefit.  The annual benefit a Participant or Beneficiary is
entitled to receive from the Base Defined Benefit Plan upon retirement,
disability, death or termination of employment, subject to the Base Defined
Benefit Plan provisions which limit such benefit to the maximum amount permitted
by the Code.
 
 
(i) Base Plan Social Security
Offset Benefit.  The annual amount of a Participant's or
Beneficiary's benefit under any “Social Security Offset Benefit,” as defined in
the Base Defined Benefit Plan, computed without regard to the Base Defined
Benefit Plan limits on compensation and benefits under the Code, plus the
Supplemental Incentive Compensation and Performance Return Retirement
Benefit.
 
 
(j) Basic
Benefit.  The annual amount of a Participant's or Beneficiary's
benefit under any “Basic Benefit,” as defined in the Base Defined Benefit Plan,
computed without regard to the Base Defined Benefit Plan limits on compensation
and benefits under the Code, plus the Supplemental Incentive Compensation and
Performance Return Retirement Benefit.
 
 
(k) Beneficiary.  A
person designated by a Participant who, as permitted under the terms of the
Plan, is or may be entitled to a benefit under the Plan in the event of the
death of the Participant.  If no Beneficiary is designated, or if the
designated Beneficiary is not then living, benefits will be paid pursuant to
Section 6.4.
 
 
(l) Board of
Directors.  The Board of Directors of AMR.
 
 
(m) Change in
Control.  A "Change in Control" as defined in Section 11 of the
AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended.  The
determination of the occurrence of a Change in Control shall be made by the
Committee, consistent with the definition of such term as contained in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto and such provisions of
the AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended.
 
 
(n) Code.  The
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
 
(o) Committee.  The
administrative committee appointed by the Board of Directors to manage and
administer this Plan.
 
 
(p) Company.  Any
subsidiary of American Airlines, Inc. or any subsidiary of AMR, which is
designated for inclusion as a participating employer in the Plan, as determined
by the Board of Directors.  
 
 
(q) Credited
Service.   The term “Credited Service” under this Plan has
the same meaning for purposes of this Plan as it has in the applicable Base
Defined Benefit Plan, except as provided in Section 2.1(d) with respect to
additional age or service credit.  
 
 
(r) Disabled (or
Disability).  "Disability” shall have the meaning defined in
section 409A(2)(C) of the Code.  Determination of Disability shall be
made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or
successor guidance thereto.
 
 
(s) Final Average Earnings
Benefit.  The annual amount of a Participant's or Beneficiary's
benefit under any “Final Average Earnings Benefit,” as defined in the Base
Defined Benefit Plan, computed without regard to the Base Defined Benefit Plan
limits on compensation and benefits under the Code, plus the Supplemental
Incentive Compensation and Performance Return Retirement Benefit.
 
 
(t) Funded Accrued
Benefit.  The portion of the present value of the vested
benefit under Article IV or Article V represented by a credit to a bookkeeping
account of a Participant as a Funded Accrued Benefit in a Trust.
 
 
(u) Funding
Account.  A bookkeeping entry maintained under the name of each
Active Funding Participant to reflect the amount of Funded Accrued Benefit on
account of such Active Funding Participant.
 
 
(v) Incentive
Compensation.  Compensation paid to a Participant on or after
January 1, 1985, in accordance with one of the annual incentive compensation
plans adopted by the Board of Directors or the Board of Directors of American
Airlines, Inc.  For purposes of this definition, long-term, multi-year
incentive compensation plans shall not be considered to be incentive
compensation plans.
 
 
(w) Non-Active Funding
Participant.  A Participant who is not yet vested in a benefit
under this Plan, or who is on a Management Leave of Absence under the AMR
Management Leave Policy or who is retired or otherwise separated from
employment, for whom no Funding Account is maintained.
 
 
(x) Non-Funded Accrued
Benefit.  The portion of the benefit under Article IV and/or
Article V not represented by amounts credited to the Funding Account of a
Participant as a Funded Accrued Benefit.
 
 
(y) Participant.  An
elected officer of American Airlines, Inc., who is a participant in a Base
Defined Benefit Plan or the $uper $aver Plus Plan, shall be a
Participant.  An individual who is an appointed officer of American
Airlines, Inc. or a designated officer of another Company may be a Participant
only if (i) he or she is a participant in a Base Defined Benefit Plan or the
$uper $aver Plus Plan and (ii) is designated as a Participant by the Board of
Directors or under a writing signed by the Chairman of AMR.
 
 
(z) Performance
Return.  Compensation paid to a Participant pursuant to a
specified portion of career equity shares granted to the Participant, as
determined by the Board of Directors.  
 
 
(aa) Plan.  The
Supplemental Executive Retirement Program of American Airlines, Inc., as
amended.  The Plan may also be referred to herein as the
“SERP”.  This Plan features a supplement to defined benefit plan
benefits as described in Article IV and a supplement to $uper $aver Plus Plan
benefits, as described in Article V.
 
 
(bb) Specified
Employee.  A “key employee”, as defined in section 416(i) of
the Code on each December 31.  If the key employee is a key employee
on December 31 of a calendar year, the key employee shall be deemed to be a
Specified Employee for the twelve (12) month period beginning on the first day
of the fourth month following such December 31.
 
 
(cc) $uper
$aver.  $uper $aver, a 401(k) Capital Accumulation Plan for
Employees of Participating AMR Corporation Subsidiaries, which qualifies under
sections 401(a) and 401(k) of the Code, and under which certain Participants are
eligible to receive benefits.
 
 
(dd) $uper $aver Plus
Plan.  $uper $aver Plus, a Supplement to $uper $aver, which
describes a program of benefits provided by employer contributions, in addition
to those benefits available under the regular provisions of $uper
$aver.  
 
 
(ee) $uper $aver Plus Plan
Account.  A
bookkeeping entry maintained under the name of each Participant to record
the deemed contributions and earnings credited under the name of the Participant
pursuant to Article V.
 
 
(ff) $uper $aver Plus Plan Excess
Contribution.  A contribution credited to the Participant's
$uper $aver Plus Plan Account that is equal to the total employer contributions
(exclusive of cash or deferred contributions under sections 401(k) and 402(g) of
the Code) that would have been credited under the Participant’s accounts in the
$uper $aver Plus Plan, commencing in 2006, based upon the Participant's
elections under the $uper $aver Plus Plan in effect as of December 31 of the
year preceding the calendar year for which the $uper $aver Plus Plan Excess
Contribution is credited, but for the provisions of sections 401(a)(17),
415 and 402(g) of the Code (or any Code sections replacing such sections with
comparable limitations).  For 2005, this election must have been in
effect as of March 15, 2005.  Additionally, the credited $uper $aver
Plus Plan Excess Contribution shall include the amount that would have been
credited to the Participant's account under the $uper $aver Plus Plan based on
the Participant's contribution rate election in effect as of December 31 of the
calendar year preceding the calendar year for which the $uper $aver Plus Plan
Excess Contribution is credited under $uper $aver if Incentive Compensation had
constituted compensation subject to deferral under $uper $aver and the $uper
$aver Plus Plan; provided that for 2005, this election must have been in effect
as of March 15, 2005.
 
 
(gg) Supplemental Incentive
Compensation Retirement Benefit.  The amount determined by
multiplying the Average Incentive Compensation by two percent for each year of
Credited Service.
 
 
(hh) Supplemental Incentive
Compensation and Performance Return Retirement Benefit.  The
difference between the benefits calculated under any “Social Security Offset
Benefit” formula as defined in the Base Defined Benefit Plan, including and
excluding Average Incentive Compensation and Average Performance Return, in each
case computed without regard to the Base Defined Benefit Plan limits on
compensation and benefits under the Code.  
 
 
(ii) Supplemental Performance
Return Retirement Benefit.  The amount determined by
multiplying the Average Performance Return by two percent for each year of
Credited Service.
 
 
(jj) Trust (or
Trusts).  The Trust Agreement Under Supplemental Executive
Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc. entered into between
American Airlines, Inc. and Wachovia Bank National Association, which funds
certain vested benefits provided pursuant to Article IV, and/or the Trust
Agreement under Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of
American Airlines, Inc. Participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, which funds
certain vested benefits provided pursuant to Article V.
 
 
(kk) Trustee.  Wachovia
Bank, National Association, or any successor thereto.
 
 
Section
2.2 Construction.  With
respect to Active Funding Participants, this Plan is an “employee pension
benefit plan” (as defined in section 3(2) of the Act) that is an “individual
account plan” and a “defined contribution plan” (as defined in section 3(34) of
the Act), and as to all other Participants, the Plan is a plan described in
sections 201(2), 301(a)(3) and 401(a)(1) of the Act.  The Plan is
exempt from Part 3 of Subtitle B of Title I of the Act pursuant to
section 301(a)(8) of the Act.  Funded Accrued Benefits are
intended not to be subject to section 409A of the Code, nor to constitute
“deferred compensation” as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(b) or
successor guidance thereto.  With respect to Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits, this non-qualified plan shall be, and is intended to be, a plan that
is unfunded and maintained by the Company to provide deferred compensation to a
select group of management or highly-compensated employees, pursuant to sections
201(2), 301(a)(3), and 401(a)(1) of the Act.  Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits are intended to be subject to the requirements of section 409A of the
Code.  The Committee shall have the exclusive discretionary authority
to interpret and construe the terms of the Plan and the exclusive discretionary
authority to determine eligibility for, and the amount of, all benefits
hereunder.  Any such determinations or interpretations of the Plan
adopted by the Committee shall be final and conclusive and shall bind all
parties, subject to Article XII.  This Plan shall be construed
consistently with the foregoing.  This Plan shall be construed insofar
as practicable so as to be consistent with the requirements of section 409A of
the Code and applicable guidance issued thereunder, to preclude plan failures
under section 409A(a)(1)(A) of the Code.  All questions pertaining to
the construction, validity and effect of the Plan shall be determined in
accordance with the laws of the United States and the State of
Texas.  If any provision of this Plan shall be held by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining provisions of this Plan
shall continue to be fully effective.  Words in the singular shall
include the plural, and vice versa, where the context
permits.  Headings and subheadings in the text of this Plan are for
reference only and shall not be considered in the construction of this
Plan.  This document serves as the Plan document and also as the
Summary Plan Description, as required by the Act.
 

ARTICLE
III
ELIGIBILITY
AND PARTICIPATION

 
Section
3.1 Participation
Designation.  Elected officers of American Airlines, Inc. who
are participants in a Base Defined Benefit Plan or the $uper $aver Plus Plan are
Participants in the Plan.  An appointed officer of American Airlines,
Inc. or an officer of another Company may be a Participant only if he or she is
a participant in a Base Defined Benefit Plan or the $uper $aver Plus Plan and is
designated as a Participant by the Board of Directors or under a writing signed
by the Chairman of AMR.
 
 
Section
3.2            Accrual
Under Base Plan.  Any Participant in this
Plan who was a Participant prior to January 1, 2001, and who ceased to
continue to accrue service for benefits under the Base Defined Benefit Plan as
of such date pursuant to an election to participate in the $uper $aver Plus Plan
shall remain eligible for the benefits accrued under Article IV of the Plan for
service prior to such date.  No further accruals of service for
benefits under Article IV of the Plan shall occur, however, after the effective
date of the Participant's election to forego participation in the Base Defined
Benefit Plan.  Such Participants who forego participation in the Base
Defined Benefit Plan shall be eligible to receive benefits determined under
Article IV with respect to service for periods prior to January 1, 2001, and/or
under Article V of the Plan, for periods commencing on and after January 1,
2001.
 
 
Section
3.3            Base Defined Benefit Plan
Participants.  Participants who continue to accrue service for
benefits in the Base Defined Benefit Plan after January 1, 2001, or who commence
participation thereafter and who do not accrue benefits under Article V of the
Plan, shall continue to accrue benefits as provided herein only under Article IV
of the Plan.
 
 
Section
3.4 Change of Participant
Status.  A Participant who is elected or appointed as an
officer and later becomes a non-officer will have any SERP benefit pursuant to
Article V as an officer frozen (subject to adjustment pursuant to Section 5.2 in
the case of benefits under Article V) as of the last date the Participant serves
as an officer, but such $uper $aver Plus Plan Account shall remain payable under
this Plan.  A Participant who is elected or appointed as an officer
and later becomes a non-officer will have any SERP benefit pursuant to Article
IV as an officer frozen as of the last date the Participant serves as an
officer, but such benefit shall remain payable under this Plan.
 

ARTICLE
IV
BENEFITS
IN CONNECTION WITH THE BASE DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN

 
Section 4.1            Base Defined Benefit
Retirement Benefit.  The Plan will pay an Annual Defined
Benefit Retirement Benefit to a Participant who earned benefits under this Plan
while participating in the Base Defined Benefit Plan.  The portion of
any such Annual Defined Benefit Retirement Benefit that was funded by a credit
to the Funding Account for an Active Funding Participant shall be paid from, and
credited against, the Participant's Funding Account and paid through the
Trust.
 
 
Section
4.2 No Benefit
Payable.  Except as provided
in this Plan, if no benefit is payable under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, then
no benefit will be payable under Article IV of the Plan.
 

ARTICLE
V
CONTRIBUTIONS
AND EARNINGS CREDITS
IN
CONNECTION WITH THE $UPER $AVER PLUS PLAN

 
Section
5.1            $uper $aver Plus Plan
Benefit.  If a Participant in
this Plan is participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, the Committee shall
credit annually to the Participant’s $uper $aver Plus Plan Account a $uper $aver
Plus Plan Excess Contribution.  
 
 
Section
5.2            Additional
Credits.  In
addition to the $uper $aver Plus Plan Excess Contribution provided for under
this Article V pursuant to Section 5.1, the Committee shall periodically,
at such times during a calendar year as shall be determined in its sole
discretion, credit or debit, as the case may be, to a Participant’s $uper $aver
Plus Plan Account, the earnings or losses that would have accrued to such $uper
$aver Plus Plan Account if such $uper $aver Plus Plan Account were invested in
the investment funds elected by the Participant during the relevant computation
period, based on the investment elections available under the $uper $aver Plus
Plan.
 
 
Section
5.3 No Benefit
Payable.  Except as provided
in this Plan, if no benefit is payable under the $uper $aver Plus Plan, then no
benefit will be payable under Article V of the Plan.  In making such
determination, benefits attributable to contributions under $uper $aver, other
than under the $uper $aver Plus Plan, shall be disregarded, except as provided
in Section 6.3.  The amount of any Funded Accrued Benefit contribution
under this Article V shall be paid to the Trust, and credited to the
Participant's Funding Account.  Amounts paid to a Participant on
account of this Article V from amounts credited to a Funding Account shall be
paid from, and credited against, the Participant's $uper $aver Plus Plan Account
and paid through a Trust.
 

ARTICLE
VI
PAYMENT
OF BENEFITS

 
Section 6.1            General
Rule.  Benefits being paid under the Plan that commenced prior
to January 1, 2005, shall, if continuing to be paid on an annuity basis as of
October 3, 2004, continue to be paid in accordance with the terms of the Plan in
effect prior to January 1, 2005.  All benefits payable on and after
January 1, 2005, shall be distributed in the form of a single lump-sum
distribution.  This change in form of payment is made pursuant to
section 3.02 of Internal Revenue Service Notice 2006-79, Internal Revenue
Service Notice 2007-86, Q&A 19(c) of Internal Revenue Service Notice 2005-1,
and section XIB of the Preamble to the Treasury Regulations under section 409A
of the Code.  In determining the amount of the lump sum distribution,
the provisions of the Base Defined Benefit Plan and the $uper $aver Plus Plan
consistent with this Plan will apply, including, but not limited to, social
security offset provisions and early retirement reductions.  In
calculating the lump sum payment of amounts payable under Article IV, the
interest rate used shall be the applicable interest rate promulgated by the
Internal Revenue Service under section 417(e)(3) of the Code for the third month
preceding the date on which payment is to be made, provided that the application
of such rate shall, commencing January 1, 2008, be phased in using the same
methodology as employed under the Retirement Benefit Plan of American Airlines,
Inc. for Agent, Management, Specialist, Support Personnel and
Officers.  Prior to 2008, the mortality rate shall be the 1983 GAM
male table for male Participants, and the 1983 GAM female table for female
Participants.  After 2007, the mortality table shall be determined
under section 430(h)(3) of the Code.
 
 
Section
6.2 Time of
Payment.  Payment of benefits payable under Article IV shall
not be paid prior to the date on which the Participant is entitled to commence
early retirement benefits under the applicable Base Retirement Plan (as in
effect on January 1, 2005, and assuming that the Participant remained in the
employment of the Company until such date of early retirement
eligibility).  Subject to such limitations, the lump sum payment of
benefits under Article IV shall be payable to the Participant not later than
sixty (60) days after the earlier of the date on which the
Participant:
 
 
(a) becomes
Disabled, or
 
 
(b) terminates
from employment with AMR and the Company in a manner constituting a “separation
from service” as defined under Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.
 

Payment
of benefits under Article V, consisting of a lump sum payment of all amounts
credited to the $uper $aver Plus Plan Account, shall be made not later than
sixty (60) days after the earliest date on which the Participant:

(a)           becomes
Disabled, or

(b)           terminates
from employment with AMR and the Company in a manner constituting a “separation
from service” as defined under Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h) or successor
guidance thereto.

This
change in time of payment is made pursuant to section 3.02 of Internal Revenue
Service Notice 2006-79, Internal Revenue Service Notice 2007-86, Q&A 19(c)
of Internal Revenue Service Notice 2005-1, and Section XIB of the Preamble to
the Treasury Regulations under section 409A of the
Code.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no distribution of Non-Funded
Accrued Benefits under this Section 6.2 to a Participant who is a Specified
Employee shall be made until the earlier of (a) thirty (30) days after the
date of death of the Participant or (b) six (6) months after the date of
termination of employment of the Participant, unless the payment is made due to
Disability or pursuant to Section 6.4 (subject also the early retirement date
limitation provided above).  Neither the Company, the Committee nor
the Participant shall have any right or power to accelerate benefit distribution
under this Plan, subject to Sections 6.3, 7.1 and Section 10.1.
 
Section
6.3 Payment
Upon a Change in Control.  Upon a Change in Control
with respect to AMR or American Airlines, Inc., a Participant will receive a
lump sum, one-time payment equal to the present value as of the date of the
Change in Control of the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement Benefit to be paid
pursuant to Article IV, or the entire amount credited to the Participant’s $uper
$aver Plus Plan Account pursuant to Article V, as applicable.  The Change in Control
payment shall be computed by assuming that payments under the Base Defined
Benefit Plan would commence at the earliest possible retirement age for the
Participant, and assuming that the Participant separated from employment as of
the Change in Control.  With respect to benefits under Article V, the
Change in Control payment shall equal the entire $uper $aver Plus Plan Account
balance under Article V as of the payment date.  In the event a
Participant is not vested in benefits under the Base Defined Benefit Plan or
under the $uper $aver Plus Plan, the Participant shall nevertheless be deemed to
have satisfied the vesting requirements of the Base Defined Benefit Plan (and of
the $uper $aver Plus Plan) for purposes of computing the amount of the Change in
Control payment.  The benefit under this Section 6.3 shall be paid in
the calendar year of the Change in Control or within sixty (60) days
thereafter.
 
 
Section
6.4 Death
Benefits.  In the event of the death of a Participant for whom
a benefit under this Plan is accrued under Article IV and after the Participant
is entitled to early retirement benefits under a Base Defined Benefit Plan, if a
surviving spouse benefit is payable under the Base Defined Benefit Plan, the
Participant’s surviving spouse will be entitled to a lump sum equivalent of the
spousal benefit that is calculated through the same methodology as used in
determination of the Annual Defined Benefit Retirement Benefit, substituting the
spousal benefit for the Base Defined Benefit Plan Benefit.  In the
event of the death of a Participant entitled to a benefit under Article V, the
Participant’s Beneficiary shall be entitled to receive a lump sum payment of the
benefit to which the Participant would have been entitled had the Participant
terminated from employment as of the date of death.  A Participant who
is accruing or has accrued benefits under Article V may designate a Beneficiary
or Beneficiaries to receive benefits payable in the event of the Participant’s
death, if any.  Any such designation shall be made in the manner
required by the Committee or its delegate, including a requirement for spousal
consent, if applicable.  If, for any reason, there is no surviving
designated Beneficiary for such benefits, benefits will be paid to the
Participant’s spouse, if then living; if the Participant’s spouse is not then
living, benefits will be paid in equal shares to each then living child of the
Participant; if no such child is then living, the benefits will be payable to
the estate of the Participant.  Such amounts will be paid in a lump
sum within sixty (60) days following the date of the Participant’s
death.
 
 
Section
6.5 Deductions for
Benefits.  In the event the
Participant has any outstanding debt with the Company, such as for payment of
taxes, the Company or the Committee may withhold or deduct from any payments to
be made to the Participant or Beneficiary under this Plan an amount(s) equal to
such outstanding debt.
 
 
Section
6.6 Payment of Funded
Benefits.  Amounts payable to an Active Funding Participant
will first be paid from the Trust through amounts credited to such Participant's
Funding Account under a Trust.  Any remaining amounts payable, and all
amounts payable to Non-Active Funding Participants, shall be paid as they become
payable from the Company's general assets or through a trust established
pursuant to Section 10.2.
 

ARTICLE
VII
AMENDMENT
AND TERMINATION

 
Section
7.1            Amendment and
Termination.  The Board of
Directors, or such person or persons, including the Committee, as may be
authorized in writing by the Board of Directors, may amend or terminate the Plan
at any time.  Any termination of the Plan which permits acceleration
of payment shall be made only in accordance with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or successor guidance thereto.
 
 
Section
7.2            Limitation on Amendment or
Termination.  No amendment or
termination pursuant to Section 7.1 shall adversely affect a benefit payable
under this Plan with respect to a Participant's employment by the Company prior
to the date of such amendment or termination unless such benefit is or becomes
payable under a successor plan or practice adopted by the Board of Directors or
its designee.
 
 
Section
7.3            Effect of Change in
Control.  Notwithstanding Sections 7.1 and 7.2 of the Plan, no
changes or amendments (including pertaining to termination) of the Plan will be
permitted after a Change in Control.
 

ARTICLE
VIII
GENERAL
CONDITIONS

 
Section
8.1            No Assignment.  The right to
receive benefits under the Plan may not be anticipated, alienated, sold,
transferred, assigned, pledged, encumbered or subjected to any charge or legal
process, and if any attempt is made to do so or a person eligible for any
benefit becomes bankrupt, the interest under the Plan of the person affected may
be terminated by the Committee and the Committee may in its sole discretion
cause the same to be held or applied for the benefit of one or more of the
dependents of such person, subject to Section 8.2 of the Plan or in the event of
the Participant’s death, if a death benefit is then payable under the
Plan.
 
 
Section
8.2            Exception for Domestic
Relations Orders.  Notwithstanding the
provisions in Section 8.1, upon receipt by the Plan of a “domestic relations
order” (as defined in section 206(d)(3)(B)(ii) of the Act) purporting to be a
“qualified domestic relations order” (as defined in section 206(d)(3)(B)(i) of
the Act), the Committee shall review such order using the domestic relations
order review procedures in effect under the Base Defined Benefit Plan or $uper
$aver, as applicable to benefits under Article IV or Article V,
respectively.  Upon the determination that a domestic relations order
meets the Plan's requirements to be a qualified domestic relations order, the
“alternate payee” (as defined in section 206(d)(3)(K) of the Act) shall be
eligible to receive benefits payable under the terms of the qualified domestic
relations order.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, an alternate
payee under a domestic relations order shall only be eligible to receive
benefits from the Plan when the Participant commences receipt of benefits under
Section 6.2.
 
 
Section 8.3            Force Majeure
Events.  In the event of any act of God, war, natural disaster,
aircraft grounding, revocation of operating certificate, terrorism, strike,
lockout, labor dispute, work stoppage, fire, epidemic or quarantine restriction,
act of government, critical materials shortage or any other act, whether similar
or dissimilar, beyond the control of the Company (each, a “Force Majeure
Event”), which Force Majeure Event affects the Company or its subsidiaries or
its affiliates, the Board of Directors, at its sole discretion, may suspend,
delay, defer or substitute (for such period of time as the Board of Directors
may deem necessary) any payments due currently or in the future under the Plan,
including, but not limited to, any payments that have accrued to the benefit of
a Participant but have not yet been paid, but only to the extent permitted under
Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(d), or successor guidance thereto.
 
 
Section
8.4 Plan
Administration.  American
Airlines, Inc., is the sponsor of the Plan and the Committee or its delegate
shall be the plan administrator, and shall have authority to manage the
operation and administration of the Plan.  The Committee may designate
one or more individuals to carry out any of its administrative responsibilities
in connection with the Plan.  The Company may employ one or more
persons to render advice to any director, officer or employee of the Company
with respect to such individual's responsibilities under the
Plan.  The Committee may act by majority vote of its members at a
meeting or by a signed writing.  The Committee may engage agents to
assist it and may engage legal counsel who may be legal counsel for the
Company.  All reasonable expenses incurred by the Committee shall be
paid by the Company.  In administering the Plan, the Committee may
conclusively rely upon the Company's payroll and personnel records and employee
benefit plan records maintained in the ordinary course of
business.  The Company may remove any member of a Committee at any
time, and a member may resign by written notice to the Company.  The
Committee may appoint successors to vacant positions, or such position may be
filled by the Company.
 

ARTICLE
IX
FUNDING

 
Section
9.1            Funding.  The Company will
pay the entire cost of the Plan, through the Trusts directly or under Section
10.2, or by direct payment, as applicable.  Any funding of a Trust for
a vested benefit accruing for a calendar year after December 31, 2004, as a
Funded Accrued Benefit, shall be made only within the calendar year of accrual
or by March 15 thereafter and shall not exceed the amount of such vested
accrual.  In the event of such funding, the amount accrued and so
funded shall be a Funded Accrued Benefit and shall not constitute deferred
compensation subject to section 409A of the Code.  Any accrued benefit
not funded through a Funding Account shall be a Non-Funded Account Benefit under
this Plan.  No contribution shall be made to a Trust during a
“restricted period” as defined in section 409A(b)(3)(B) of the Code, to the
extent such contribution would cause amounts to be taxable under section 409A of
the Code.
 

ARTICLE
X
TRUST

 
Section 10.1 Trust
Documents.  The Company established an irrevocable trust
effective October  14, 2002, pursuant to the Trust Agreement Under
Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines,
Inc., to fund the anticipated after-tax distributions of Funded Accrued Benefits
under Article IV of the Plan, as determined by the Committee, as of
October 14, 2002, and as determined from time to time thereafter, and an
irrevocable trust effective September 15, 2005, pursuant to the Trust Agreement
under Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American
Airlines, Inc. Participating in the $uper $aver Plus Plan, to fund the
anticipated after-tax distributions of Funded Benefits under Article V of the
Plan, as determined by the Committee.  Wachovia Bank, National
Association serves as the Trustee of the Trusts and holds the Trust assets for
the purpose of accumulating funds to pay Funded Accrued Benefits under the Plan
as they become due and payable.  The Trusts are so-called “secular
trusts” for Federal income tax purposes.  The assets of each Trust are
not subject to the claims of creditors of the Company or any of its corporate
affiliates.  Moreover, the contributions to the Trusts and the Trusts’
earnings will generally be taxable income to the Participants, although
subsequent distributions from the already taxed amounts will be made to
Participants free of Federal income tax.
 
 
Section
10.2 Trust for Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits.  To assist in the payment of Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits following a Change in Control, the Board of Directors or the Company's
General Counsel or the Company's Corporate Secretary may establish a trust, or
utilize a separate trust heretofore established, to fund Non-Funded Accrued
Benefits under the Plan.
 
 
Section
10.3 Requirements for the
Separate Trust for Non-Funded Accrued Benefits.  The trust
which may be established or otherwise utilized pursuant to Section 10.2 will be
maintained:
 
(a)           with
a nationally recognized banking institution with experience in serving as a
trustee for such matters,

(b)           with
the entirety of its assets held in the United States,

(c)           pursuant
to such documentation as recommended by outside counsel to the Company,
and

(d)           funded
so as to enable the trust to pay some or all of the Non-Funded Accrued Benefits
contemplated under the Plan, as may be determined by the Company's independent
compensation consultant, selected by the Company, in its sole and absolute
discretion.  Such trust shall be established in a manner not resulting
in taxable income pursuant to section 409A(b) of the Code.

Section
10.4                                Additional
Actions.  In addition, the Board of Directors, the Company's
General Counsel or the Company's Corporate Secretary may take any additional
actions deemed reasonably necessary to accomplish the stated purpose of Section
10.2.

ARTICLE
XI
ERISA
RIGHTS

 
Section
11.1 Statement of ERISA Rights in
Summary Plan Description.  As a Participant in any Funded
Accrued Benefits under the Plan, you are entitled to certain rights and
protections under ERISA.  ERISA provides that all Plan participants
shall be entitled to:
 




·  


Examine,
      without charge, at the plan administrator’s office, all Plan documents,
      including copies of all documents filed with the U.S. Department of Labor,
      such as Summary Annual Reports (SARs) and a copy of the latest Form 5500
      annual report filed by the Plan with the U.S. Department of Labor and
      available at the Public Disclosure Room of the Employee Benefits Security
      Administration.








·  


Obtain
      copies of all Plan documents and other Plan information including copies
      of the latest Form 5500 annual report and this Plan upon written request
      to the plan administrator. The plan administrator may charge a reasonable
      amount for the copies.








·  


Receive
      a summary of the Plan’s annual financial report (SAR). The plan
      administrator is required by law to furnish each participant with a
      SAR.








·  


Obtain
      a statement telling you whether you have a right to receive a pension at
      normal retirement age under the Plan and, if so, what the benefit amount
      would be at normal retirement age if you were to stop working now. This
      statement must be requested in writing and is not required to be given
      more often than once a year. This statement must be provided free of
      charge.





In
addition to creating rights for Plan participants, ERISA imposes duties upon the
people responsible for the Plan’s operation. The people who supervise the Plan’s
operation, called “Fiduciaries,” have a duty to do their jobs prudently and
solely in the interest of you and other Plan participants and
beneficiaries.  Fiduciaries who violate ERISA may be removed and
required to make good any losses they have caused the Plan.  No one,
including your employer or any other person may fine you or otherwise
discriminate against you in any way to prevent you from obtaining a pension
benefit or exercising your rights under ERISA.

The plan
administrator has the sole discretionary authority to interpret the terms of the
Plan and to determine eligibility for and entitlement to Plan benefits in
accordance with the terms of the Plan. Any interpretation or determination made
pursuant to such discretionary authority shall be given full force and effect
under the Plan.

If a
claim for a benefit is denied or ignored in whole or in part, you must receive a
written explanation of the reason for the denial. You have the right to have the
plan administrator review and reconsider the claim.  No one, including
an employer or any other person, may fire you or discriminate against you in any
way to prevent you from obtaining a benefit from the Plan or exercising your
rights under ERISA.

Under
ERISA, there are steps you can take to enforce the above rights. For instance,
if you request materials from the plan administrator and do not receive them
within thirty (30) days, you may sue in federal court. The court may require the
plan administrator to provide the materials and pay you up to $110 a day until
you receive the materials, unless the materials were not sent because of reasons
beyond the plan administrator’s control. If you have a claim for benefits that
is denied or ignored, in whole or in part, you may file suit in a state or
federal court.  In addition, if you disagree with the Plan’s decision
or lack thereof concerning the qualified status of a domestic relations order,
you may file suit in federal court.

If the
Plan’s Fiduciaries misuse the Plan’s money, or if you are discriminated against
for asserting your rights, you may seek assistance from the U.S. Department of
Labor, or you may file suit in a federal court. The court will decide who should
pay court costs and legal fees. If you are successful, the court may order the
person you have sued to pay those costs and fees. If you lose (i.e., if the
court finds your claim frivolous), the court may order you to pay these costs
and fees.

If you
have any questions about the Plan, contact the plan administrator.  If
there are any questions about this section or about your rights under ERISA, you
should contact the nearest office of the Employee Benefits Security
Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor listed in your telephone
directory or the Division of Technical Assistance and Inquiries, Employee
Benefits Security Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, 200 Constitution
Avenue, N.W. Washington, D.C 20210. You may also obtain certain publications
about your rights and responsibilities under ERISA by calling the publications
hotline of the Employee Benefits Security Administration.

ARTICLE
XII
CLAIMS
PROCEDURES
 
Section
12.1 Claims.  A
claim for retirement benefits under the Plan must be submitted to the plan
administrator at the time and in the manner prescribed by the plan
administrator.
 

If the
plan administrator determines that you are not entitled to receive all or part
of the benefits you claim, a notice will be provided to you within a reasonable
period of time, but no later than 90 days from the day your claim was received
by the plan administrator.  This notice (which will be provided to you
in writing by mail or hand delivery or through email) will
describe:
 




·  


The
      plan administrator’s determination,




 




·  


The
      basis for the determination (along with appropriate references to
      pertinent Plan provisions on which the denial is
  based),




 




·  


A
      description of any additional material or information necessary to perfect
      the claim and an explanation of why such material is necessary,
      and




 




·  


The
      procedure you must follow to obtain a review of the determination,
      including a description of the appeals procedure and your right to bring a
      cause of action for benefits under section 502(a) of ERISA. This notice
      will also, if appropriate, explain how you may properly complete your
      claim and why the submission of additional information may be
      necessary.




 
In
certain instances, the plan administrator may not be able to make a
determination within ninety (90) days from the day your claim for benefits was
submitted. In such situations, the plan administrator, in its sole and absolute
discretion, may extend the ninety (90) day period for up to one hundred eighty
(180) days, as long as the plan administrator provides you with a written notice
within the initial ninety (90) day period that explains:
 




·  


The
      reason for the extension, and




 




·  


 The date on which a
      decision is expected.




 
 
Section
12.2 Claim
Appeals.  If your claim for benefits is denied, either in whole
or in part, you may appeal the plan administrator’s denial by requesting a
review of your claim by the Committee (or its delegate).  Your written
request for an appeal must be received by the plan administrator within sixty
(60) days of the date you received your notice that the plan administrator
denied your claim.
 
As part
of your appeal, you may submit written comments, documents, records and other
information relating to your claim for benefits. You may also request reasonable
access to, and copies of, all documents, records, and other information relevant
to your claim. You will not be charged for this information. The Committee’s (or
its delegate’s) review of the plan administrator’s adverse determination will
take into account all comments, documents, records and other information you
submitted, without regard to whether such information was submitted and
considered in the plan administrator’s initial determination of your
claim.

If, after
reviewing your appeal and any further information that you have submitted, the
Committee (or its delegate) denies your claim, either in whole or in part, a
notice (which will be provided to you in writing by mail or hand delivery, or
through email) will be provided to you within a reasonable period of time, but
not later than sixty (60) days from the day your request for a review was
received by the plan administrator. In the event that an extension of time for
processing is required, you will be provided a written notice of the extension
not later than sixty (60) days from the day your request for a review was
received by the plan administrator.  In such situations, the Committee
(or its delegate), in its sole and absolute discretion, may extend the sixty
(60) day period for up to one hundred twenty (120) days, as long as the
Committee (or its delegate) provides you with a written notice within the
initial sixty (60) day period that explains:
 




·  


The
      reason for the extension, and




 




·  


The
      date on which a decision is
expected.




 




·  


The
      notice describing the Committee’s (or its delegate’s) decision will
      describe:




 




·  


The
      specific reason or reasons for its decision, including any adverse
      determinations;




 




·  


References
      to the specific Plan, Base Defined Benefit Plan or $uper $aver Plus Plan
      provisions on which the Committee (or its delegate)  based its
      determination;




 




·  


 Your right to
      receive, upon request and free of charge, reasonable access to, and copies
      of, all documents, records and other information relevant to your
      claim;




 




·  


 A description of any
      voluntary appeals procedures, if any, and your right to obtain information
      about such procedures, and




 




·  


Your
      right to bring a cause of action for benefits under section 502(a) of
      ERISA.





ARTICLE
XIII
FINALITY
OF DECISIONS OR ACTS
 
Section
13.1 Determination is
Final.  The Committee has the express authority to elect the
actuarial assumptions to be used in funding any benefits payable under the Plan
and, except as specified hereunder in Section 7.3 and in Article XII, to
interpret any provision of this Plan and to determine, at its sole discretion,
the meaning and application of any such provision as to each Participant or
Beneficiary under the Plan in accordance with the facts and circumstances of
each particular claim.  Except for the right of a Participant or
Beneficiary to appeal the denial of a claim, any decision or action of the
Committee, within its scope of authority, shall be final and binding on all
persons claiming a right to benefits under the Plan.  No benefit shall
be payable that the Committee does not deem is payable under the terms of the
Plan.
 


 



 






 




ARTICLE
XIV
GENERAL
INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR PLAN





Plan
      Name:


The
      Supplemental Executive Retirement Program (SERP) for Officers of American
      Airlines, Inc.





Plan
Sponsor:                                                      American
Airlines, Inc.
P O Box 619616
MD 5146
DFW International Airport, Texas
75261-9616

Employer
ID
No.:                                                      13-1502798

Plan
Number:                                                      888

Type of
Plan:                                                      As
described in Section 2.2

Plan
Administrator:                                                      Administrative
Committee
American Airlines, Inc.
4333 Amon Carter Blvd.
Fort Worth,
TX   76155
Attn:  Corporate
Secretary
Telephone:  817-963-1234

Legal
Agent:                                                      CT
Corporation

Trustee:                                           Wachovia
Bank National Association

Trustee(s)
Address:                                                      Wachovia
Bank National Association
Attn:  Executive
Services
One West Fourth Street
Winston-Salem,
NC  27150

Funding
Arrangement:                                                      Company
Liability for Non Funded Accrued Benefits
Trusts for Funded Accrued
Benefits

Plan
Year:                                                      January
1 to December 31


 



 






 



AS
AMENDED AND RESTATED EFFECTIVE AS OF JANUARY 1, 2005.


American
Airlines, Inc.


By:           


Its:           



EX-10.128
19
ex10128.htm
TRUST AGREEMENT UNDER SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM FOR OFFICERS PARTICIPATING IN DB PLAN

ex10128.htm
























TRUST
AGREEMENT
UNDER
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.



Amended
and Restated effective June 1, 2007



 



 






 



Table
of Contents

 
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      1.1.Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.2.Actuary

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.3.Beneficiary

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.4.Code

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.5.Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.6.Compensation Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.7.Corporation

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.8.Expense Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.9.Fund

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.10.Investment Manager

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.11.Participant

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.12.Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.13.Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.14.Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      1.15.Valuation Date

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
II CREATION, PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      2.1.Purpose of the Trust; Separate Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      2.2.Administration of the Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      2.3.Irrevocable; Not Subject to Creditor Claims

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      2.4.Secured Interest; Separate Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
III ACCOUNTS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      3.1.Fund and Accounts.

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      3.2.Written Certifications Provided by Corporation to the Trustee[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.3.Benefits Payable

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.4.Account Adjustment

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.5.Maintenance of Accounts

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.6.Taxability of the Trust and the Participants.

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.7.Accumulation/Distribution of Trust Income

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      3.8.Contributions by the Corporation for Income Taxes

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IV CONTRIBUTIONS, CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      4.1.Contributions to the Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      4.2.Provision of Benefits is Binding Obligation of Corporation[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      4.3.Provision of Reports and Written Certifications by the Corporation to
      the Trustee[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]








Section
      4.4.Distributions to Participants

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE V
ACTUARY [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
      5.1.Determination of Corporation’s Fund Contributions by Actuary[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      5.2.Resignation/Removal of Actuary

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VI INVESTMENTS AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE[INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      6.1.Fund Held in Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.2.Types of Investments

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.3.Powers and Authority of Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.4.Investment of Fund by Investment Manager

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.5.Making Benefit Payments

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.6.Deposit of Contributions by Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.7.Dealings with the Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      6.8.Use of Fund Assets to Pay Trust Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VII DUTIES OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      7.1.General Duties of the Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.2.Valuation of Fund

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.3.Reports and Records

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.4.No Duty to Advance Funds or to Administer the Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      7.5.Resignation/Removal of Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VIII COMPENSATION, IMMUNITIES AND INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      8.1.Trustee Compensation and Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      8.2.Expense Account

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      8.3.Immunities

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      8.4.Indemnity of the Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
      8.5.Determination of Interests in the Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal
      Proceedings[INSERT PAGE
      NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IX AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




Section
      9.1.Amendment of Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      9.2.Termination of Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE X
THE COMMITTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      10.1.Membership and Actions of the Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      10.2.Committee Compensation and Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      10.3.Indemnity of Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
XI MISCELLANEOUS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section
      11.1.Governing Law

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.2.No Effect on Employment

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.3.Successors

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.4.Severability

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.5.Incorporation of Plan as Part of Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.6.Execution in Counterparts

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.7.Effect of Divisions and Captions

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.8.Gender and Number

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section
      11.9.Mistake of Fact

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 



 






 



TRUST
AGREEMENT
 
UNDER
 
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
 
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.
 
THIS
AGREEMENT (the or this “Agreement”) was adopted effective as of the 14th day of
October, 2002, by and between AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC. (the “Corporation”), a
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, and
WACHOVIA BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION (the “Trustee”), a national association
organized and existing under the laws of the United States, and the individuals
constituting the Committee described in Section 10.1 (the
“Committee”).  By this instrument the Corporation hereby amends and
restates the Agreement in the entirety, effective as of June 1, 2007 (the
“Effective Date”).
 
RECITALS
 
WHEREAS, in January 1985, the
Board of Directors of AMR Corporation established the Supplemental Executive
Retirement Program for Officers of American Airlines, Inc., as subsequently
amended (the “Plan”), for the purpose of paying retirement benefits to certain
officers of American Airlines, Inc. (the “Participants”) in excess of the amount
payable under the Corporation’s defined benefit plan; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation has
established an irrevocable trust to fund certain retirement benefits of the
Participants of the Plan; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires the Trustee to continue to undertake the responsibility for the
protection and conservation of the assets of the Trust, under the terms of the
Agreement; the Trustee is willing to continue such responsibility and the
Corporation has delivered assets to the Trustee to hold in trust for the purpose
of accumulating funds to pay benefits under the Plan as they become due and
payable; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires that the Committee under the Plan be responsible for the administration
of the Trust, and the Committee has undertaken the responsibility and duties of
the Committee pursuant to the terms of the Agreement; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
intends the Trust to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax purposes,
whereby the Participants will be subject to current taxation on the funds held
in the Trust; and
 
WHEREAS, the trust established
by this Agreement is not intended to be a “grantor trust” pursuant to sections
671 through 679 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”),
but is intended to be a taxable trust pursuant to sections 641 et seq. of the Code;
and
 
WHEREAS, subsequently to the
Effective Date, Revenue Ruling 2007-48 has been issued by the U.S. Treasury
Department, and the Corporation desires to update the Agreement so that the
Trust continues to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax purposes;

 
NOW, THEREFORE, in
consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the Corporation, the
Trustee and the Committee hereby amend and restate the Agreement in the
entirety, to provide as follows:
 
ARTICLE
I
 
DEFINITIONS
 
Each word
or phrase used herein which is in quotations shall have the meaning set forth in
this Article I, unless a different meaning is clearly required by
context.
 
Section
1.1.                                 Account.  “Account”
means the separate account established and maintained under the Fund with
respect to each Participant to provide a source of funds for the benefits
payable by the Corporation to, or with respect to, each such Participant under
the Plan.
 
Section
1.2.                                 Actuary.  “Actuary”
means the then acting actuary or firm of actuaries employed by the Corporation
to advise the Corporation with respect to contributions to be made under the
Plan.  The initial Actuary shall be Towers, Perrin, Forster &
Crosby, Inc. and Subsidiaries.
 
Section
1.3.                                 Beneficiary.  “Beneficiary”
holds the identical definition of the term as defined in the Plan.
 
Section
1.4.                                 Code.  “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
Section
1.5.                                 Committee.  “Committee”
means the committee of persons to whom the Corporation has delegated the
responsibility of the Trust’s administration.
 
Section
1.6.                                 Compensation
Committee.  “Compensation Committee” means the compensation Committee
of the Board of Directors of AMR Corporation.
 
Section
1.7.                                 Corporation.  “Corporation”
means American Airlines, Inc. and any successor thereto, or to the business
thereof, by whatever form or manner resulting.
 
Section
1.8.                                 Expense
Account.  A separate account of the Fund whereby the
Corporation may make contributions to be utilized by the Trustee to pay the
compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other
expenses of the Trust.
 
Section
1.9.                                 Fund.  “Fund”
means the money and property held by the Trustee under this
Agreement.
 
Section
1.10.                                 Investment
Manager.  “Investment Manager” means the then acting manager of
all or any of the assets of the Fund that is appointed by the Committee to
exercise investment responsibility with respect to all or such portion of the
Fund as determined by the Committee.
 
Section
1.11.                                 Participant.  “Participant”
means an “Active Funding Participant” in the Plan as defined at Section 2.1(b)
of the Plan.  
 
Section
1.12.                                 Plan.  “Plan”
means the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American
Airlines, Inc. originally effective January 1, 1985, and as amended from time to
time, including certain retirement benefits heretofore authorized and which may
hereafter be authorized to be payable to certain employees of the
Corporation.
 
Section
1.13.                                 Trust.  “Trust”
means the trust provided for under this Agreement.
 
Section
1.14.                                 Trustee.  “Trustee”
means the then acting trustee of the Trust.  The initial trustee of
the Trust is Wachovia Bank, National Association.
 
Section
1.15.                                 Valuation
Date.  “Valuation Date” means (i) the last business day of each
calendar quarter; (ii) in the case of a Participant who retires or whose
employment with the Corporation is terminated for any reason, the last business
day of the calendar month coincident with or immediately preceding the date of
such retirement or termination; and (iii) each other date or dates specified by
the Committee to the Trustee for the valuation of the Fund and adjustment of
Accounts.
 
ARTICLE
II
 
CREATION,
PURPOSE AND
 
ADMINISTRATION
OF THE TRUST
 
Section
2.1.                                 Purpose of the Trust;
Separate Trust.  This Trust is established by the Corporation,
the Trustee and the Committee for the purpose of accumulating funds to pay
benefits under the Plan.  Payments from the Fund to Participants or
their Beneficiaries shall be in discharge of the Corporation’s liability under
the terms of the Plan to such Participants to the extent such benefits are paid
from the Fund.  The Corporation intends that each Account established
pursuant to Article III be treated as a separate trust designed to satisfy, in
whole or in part, the Corporation’s liability under the Plan to the Participant
with respect to whom such Account is maintained.
 
Section
2.2.                                 Administration of the
Trust.  The Committee shall be solely responsible for the
administration of the Trust.  The Committee shall, upon request of the
Trustee, furnish the Trustee with such reasonable information as is necessary or
appropriate for the Trustee to carry out its responsibilities under this
Agreement, and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the
information received from the Committee.  The Corporation shall be
responsible for the administration of the Plan.  The Corporation
shall, upon request of either the Committee or the Trustee, furnish each of the
Committee and the Trustee with such reasonable information as each of the
Committee or the Trustee shall deem necessary or appropriate to carry out the
intent and purposes of the Trust, and each of the Committee and the Trustee
shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the information received from the
Corporation, unless, in the case of the Trustee, the Committee has informed the
Trustee in writing not to rely on such information.  
 
Section
2.3.                                 Irrevocable; Not Subject to
Creditor Claims.  Subject to the provisions of Section 9.2
hereof, this Trust shall be irrevocable.  In addition, the Fund shall
not be subject to the claims of the creditors of the Corporation in a bankruptcy
or other insolvency proceeding under Federal or state law, but shall be
maintained for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to Participants under
the Plan.  The right to receive benefits under the Plan through this
Agreement may not be anticipated, alienated, sold, transferred, assigned,
pledged, encumbered or subjected to any charge or legal process, and the
non-alienation provisions of Sections 8.1 and 8.2 of the Plan are hereby
incorporated in the entirety by this reference.  
 
Section
2.4.                                 Secured Interest; Separate
Account.  Each Participant shall have a secured interest in the
Account maintained in the Fund with respect to the benefits payable under the
Plan.  Each Participant’s Account will be maintained as a “separate
account” within the meaning of section 404(a)(5) of the Code.  The
Corporation agrees that during the existence of the Trust, the Corporation shall
not permit or cause, or amend this Agreement to permit or cause, the Fund, or
any part thereof, to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the payment
of benefits under the Plan to Participants and their Beneficiaries.
 
ARTICLE
III
 
ACCOUNTS
 
Section
3.1.                                 Fund and
Accounts.
 
(a) The Fund
under this Trust shall consist of such sums of money or other property (and the
earnings thereon) as shall from time to time be paid or delivered to the Trustee
and held by it pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
 
(b) Contributions
to the Trust with respect to the benefits of Participants shall be credited to
Accounts as provided in Section 3.4.  At the time the Corporation
makes an initial contribution to the Trust with respect to the benefits of a
Participant, it shall notify the Trustee of such fact and an Account shall be
established by the Trustee under the Fund.  The Corporation shall
provide the Trustee with such information or reports as are necessary to credit
contributions to the Account maintained with respect to each Participant in
accordance with Section 4.3 hereof.
 
Section
3.2.                                 Written Certifications
Provided by Corporation to the Trustee.  Subject to this
Section 3.2, the Trustee shall have responsibility for the maintenance of
Account records, including, without limitation, the responsibility for making
determinations regarding the adjustment of such Accounts under Section
3.4.  The Corporation shall provide the Trustee from time to time, but
not less frequently than annually, with written certifications pursuant to
Section 4.3 hereof concerning the amount and form of benefits payable to
each Participant under the Plan and the time or times when such benefits shall
become payable.  Each such certification shall state that it is made
in accordance with the terms of the Plan, is binding on the Trustee, and may not
be modified, amended or rescinded in any manner whatsoever, except by a
subsequent certification which complies with the requirements of Section
4.3.  The Trustee shall not be bound by, and shall ignore, any such
certification which does not comply with the requirements of Section
4.3.  The Trustee shall make payments to Participants and
Beneficiaries strictly in accordance with the terms of Section 4.4 hereof and
shall have no responsibility or duty to evaluate such certifications or other
reports with respect to their validity, accuracy or completeness or to make any
inquiry regarding the data or information contained therein.  If the
Corporation does not provide the Trustee with the information necessary to
establish an Account pursuant to this Section 3.2 and Section 4.3 herein, the
Trustee shall deposit any contributions for which it has not received
information into the Trustee’s Expense Account, and shall maintain the
contributions in its Expense Account until it has received such
information.
 
Section
3.3.                                 Benefits
Payable.  Any benefits becoming payable under the Plan to a
Participant or Beneficiary shall be paid from the Fund and charged against the
Account maintained with respect to the benefits of such
Participant.  No payment shall be made from the Fund to or with
respect to a Participant to the extent that such payment would exceed the
balance then remaining credited in the Account maintained with respect to such
Participant.
 
Section
3.4.                                 Account
Adjustment.  As of each Valuation Date, and based upon the
results of its valuation of the Fund as of such Valuation Date, the Committee
shall direct the Trustee to adjust Accounts to reflect realized and unrealized
gains, income and losses and chargeable expenses of the Fund on an accrual basis
since the preceding Valuation Date, in accordance with the provisions of this
Section 3.4.  The Account will be adjusted to reflect payment of
taxes paid by the Trust with respect to such contributions.  The
amount creditable to the Account of a Participant as of a Valuation Date
selected by the Committee after payment of any benefits and/or applicable
withholding taxes shall not exceed the Participant’s vested accrued benefit
under the Plan as of such date, as determined by the Committee, in its sole and
absolute discretion.  The allocation of any amounts creditable as
contributions, income, losses and realized or unrealized appreciation to the
Account of the Participant shall be limited so that the balance as of such
Valuation Date does not exceed the Participant’s accrued benefit under the
Plan.  Any excess shall rather be allocable to other known or
reasonably anticipated liabilities arising under the Plan and/or the
Trust.  The Trustee shall be under no obligation to question such
allocation adjustment.
 
Section
3.5.                                 Maintenance of
Accounts.  Once established, an Account shall be maintained
with respect to the benefits of each Participant until it has been liquidated
through distribution to the Participant, or a Beneficiary thereof.
 
Section
3.6.                                 Taxability of the Trust and
the Participants.
 
(a) It is
intended that the Trust not constitute a “grantor trust” under sections 671
through 679 of the Code, and, notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to
the contrary, the Corporation, as the grantor of the Trust, shall not possess
any power under this Agreement that would cause the Trust to constitute a
“grantor trust.”  It is intended that the Trust constitute a taxable
entity under sections 641 et.
seq. of the Code.  Accordingly, the Trustee acknowledges and
agrees that the Corporation is not the owner of the Trust for Federal income tax
purposes.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the
contrary, none of the powers granted to the Trustee shall be construed to enable
the Corporation, the Trustee or anyone else, to buy, exchange or otherwise deal
with the Fund for less than adequate and full consideration in money or money’s
worth, or to enable the Corporation, the Trustee or any entity in which the
Corporation, the Trustee, or both, have a substantial interest, to borrow from
the Fund, directly or indirectly, without adequate interest or security; no one
but the Trustee (or the Investment Manager) may vote or direct the vote of any
corporate shares or other securities of the Trust, or control the Trust’s
investments or reinvestments by substituting other property of equal value; the
Trustee is not required to surrender Trust assets upon being tendered substitute
assets, regardless of the relative values of the assets involved.
 
(b) The Trust
is a funded trust, and, as such, it is intended that each Participant in respect
of whom an Account is maintained be taxed in accordance with section 402(b) of
the Code.  Consequently, contributions to the Trust by the Corporation
shall be taxable to the Participants in accordance with section 402(b)(1) of the
Code.  (The Corporation shall take a deduction for the amount of such
contributions, for United States Federal income tax purposes in accordance with
section 404(a)(5) of the Code.)  Except as is necessary to satisfy any
Trust obligation, if any, to withhold taxes and to pay over such withheld
amounts to the appropriate taxing authorities, the Trust shall not have any
obligation or liability for the payment of any income, estate, gift or
employment taxes payable by a Participant or Beneficiary, or the estate of a
Participant or Beneficiary, with respect to benefits payable under the
Plan.  The Trustee shall have the responsibility to file any tax
returns, reports or other information as may be required by any Federal, state,
local or other taxing or governmental authority with respect to the Trust, its
income and distribution and withholding therefrom.  Pursuant to
Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 2007-48 or successor guidance thereto,
the Corporation, if required to withhold employment taxes at the time of
contribution, shall withhold and transmit such taxes.  The Corporation
and the Trustee shall comply as required by law to achieve proper reporting in
connection with tax reporting requirements.
 
Section
3.7.                                 Accumulation/Distribution of
Trust Income.  All of the income and gain derived from the Fund
shall be accumulated and allocated to the Accounts of the Participants pursuant
to Section 3.4 hereof; provided, however,
that the Committee shall have the right, in its sole and absolute discretion, to
instruct the Trustee to distribute all or a portion of such income and gain
credited to the Participants’ respective Accounts to the
Participants.
 
Section
3.8.                                 Contributions by the
Corporation for Income Taxes.  If the income and gain derived
by the Trust in any taxable year is subject to United States Federal, state or
local income tax (e.g., because the Committee has elected not to distribute such
income and gain to the Participants) the Trustee shall pay such income taxes
from the Fund except to the extent that the Corporation contributes to the Trust
an amount to enable the Trustee to pay such income taxes.  To the
extent such taxes are paid from the Fund, the Accounts shall be reduced on a
pro-rata basis, subject to Section 3.4.  An amount contributed for
such purpose shall be allocated to each respective applicable Account and the
payment shall be charged against such applicable
Account.  
 
ARTICLE
IV
 
CONTRIBUTIONS,
CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
 
Section
4.1.                                 Contributions to the
Trust.  The Corporation may make such contributions to the
Trust as it shall determine in its sole and absolute discretion, are necessary
to provide benefits to the Participants under the Plan and for the Trust to pay
any income taxes due on its income and gain (as provided in Section 3.8 of this
Agreement).  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
herein, no person, including, without limitation, the Trustee, the Actuary, any
Participant or former Participant, or any Beneficiary thereof, shall have the
right to require the Corporation to make any contribution to the Trust or to
question the accuracy or correctness of any amounts so contributed.
 
Section
4.2.                                 Provision of Benefits is
Binding Obligation of Corporation.  Except to the extent that
benefits to which a Participant, or the Beneficiary thereof, is entitled under
the Plan are actually paid from the Fund, nothing contained in this Agreement
shall relieve the Corporation of its obligations under the Plan to or with
respect to such Participant.
 
Section
4.3.                                 Provision of Reports and
Written Certifications by the Corporation to the Trustee.  The
Corporation shall maintain, and furnish the Trustee with, such reports,
documents, and information as shall be required by the Trustee to carry out its
obligations under this Agreement, including, without limitation, written reports
setting forth the identity of Participants with respect to whose benefits
contributions are made to the Trust and the amount of such contributions, and
the written certifications regarding Participants’ benefits described
below.  At or about the time an Account is established with respect to
the benefits of a Participant, the Corporation shall furnish the Trustee with a
written certification which includes the amount of the Participant’s benefits,
the time or times as of which such benefits shall become payable, the present
value of such benefits as of a specific date or dates, any conditions which must
be satisfied in order for the Participant to become entitled to such benefits,
and the identity of the Participant’s Beneficiary and the specific conditions
under which benefits shall become payable to such Beneficiary.  Such
certifications may be revised by the Corporation at any time, and from time to
time, to reflect, among other things, entitlement of the Participant to
increased benefits or an earlier time of payment under the Plan and to reflect
changes in Beneficiary designations by the Participant.  No
certification shall be revised, nor shall the Trustee be bound by or honor any
such revision, to decrease the benefits of a Participant or to impose additional
or more stringent conditions with respect to a Participant’s eligibility for
benefits.  The Trustee shall rely on the most recent reports,
documents, information, and certifications furnished to it by the Corporation
which comply with the preceding sentence.
 
Section
4.4.                                 Distributions to
Participants.  At such time as a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, is entitled to the receipt of benefits from the Plan, he or
she shall be entitled to receive from the Account maintained with respect to
such Participant the amount in cash or property, as the case may be, to which he
or she is entitled under the terms of the Plan taking into account any prior
distributions made to the Participant under the Plan.  The Trustee
also shall make payments from the Fund to each Participant or Beneficiary
entitled thereto under the Plan in accordance with Section 3.7 hereof upon
direction from the Committee.  All distributions made by the Trust
shall be in accordance with the most recent certification filed with the Trustee
pursuant to and in compliance with Section 4.3 promptly upon receipt of written
direction from the Corporation or upon receipt of evidence submitted by the
Participant satisfactory to the Trustee that the Participant has retired or
otherwise terminated his employment with the Corporation, voluntarily or
otherwise.  The Trustee shall not be required to engage in its own
independent investigation regarding any such payment, but shall provide the
Corporation with written confirmation of the fact and amount of such payment
after it is made.
 
ARTICLE
V
 
ACTUARY
 
Section
5.1.                                 Determination of
Corporation’s Fund Contributions by Actuary.  The Actuary shall
calculate from time to time the amount of the contributions that it estimates
should be made to the Fund by the Corporation for the purpose to accumulate
funds to provide benefits under the Plan; provided, however that, pursuant to
Section 4.1 hereof, the Committee may determine, in its sole and absolute
discretion, whether, and to what extent, the Corporation shall be required to
make contributions to the Fund.
 
Section
5.2.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Actuary.  The Actuary may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Corporation.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received.  The Actuary may be removed by the
Corporation at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Actuary.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Actuary and the Corporation.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, in no event will any such resignation or removal be effective
until a successor Actuary has been appointed upon such resignation or
removal.  Upon the Corporation’s receipt of notice of such resignation
or removal, the Corporation shall appoint a successor Actuary, by written
instrument, to serve commencing on the effective date of the former Actuary’s
resignation or removal.  If a successor is not appointed by the
Corporation within sixty (60) days after the issuance of notice of the Actuary’s
resignation or removal, the Committee shall appoint the successor
Actuary.
 
ARTICLE
VI
 
INVESTMENTS
AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
6.1.                                 Fund Held in
Trust.  The Fund shall be held in trust by the
Trustee.  The sole responsibilities, powers and duties of the Trustee
with respect to the Trust and the Fund shall be as set forth in this
Agreement.  The Trustee shall be a directed trustee only, with no
discretionary authority or responsibility, with respect to the Fund except to
the extent that it has discretion within investment guidelines provided to it in
writing by the Committee.
 
Section
6.2.                                 Types of
Investments.  
 
(a) Except as
otherwise provided in Section 6.4, the Trustee shall invest and reinvest the
assets of the Trust, without distinction between principal and income, pursuant
to investment guidelines delivered to it in a manner which has the primary
purpose of preservation of principal and liquidity of the Fund and, secondarily,
to the extent consistent with the goal to preserve principal and liquidity of
the Fund, which maximizes the income of the Fund.  The Trustee is
expressly authorized to invest the Fund, or any portion thereof, in any
property, real, personal or mixed, wherever situated, and whether or not
productive of income or consisting of wasting assets, including, without
limitation, common and preferred stocks, mutual funds, bonds, notes, debentures,
securities convertible into common stock, leaseholds, mortgages (including,
without limitation, any collective or part interest in any bond and mortgage or
note and mortgage), interest bearing accounts and certificates of deposit, oil,
mineral or gas properties, royalties, interests or rights (including equipment
pertaining thereto), equipment trust certificates, investment trust
certificates, savings bank deposits, and commercial paper, provided that the
assets of the Trust shall at no time be invested in the equity or debt
securities, whether secured or unsecured, of the Corporation, its affiliates or
its trades or businesses except to the extent such security may be held in a
mutual fund.  Pending such investment and reinvestment, the Trustee
may temporarily invest and reinvest the funds, at its discretion, in any
marketable short and medium term fixed income securities, United States Treasury
Bills, other short and medium term government obligations, commercial paper,
other money market instruments and part interests in any one or more of the
foregoing or money market mutual funds, or may maintain cash balances consistent
with the liquidity needs of the Trust as determined by the Trustee.
 
(b) The
Trustee shall, at the direction of the Committee, purchase life insurance and/or
annuity contracts providing flexible funding or similar vehicles or for the
investment of assets in separate accounts invested in any securities and other
property including real estate, regardless of whether or not the insurance
carrier shall have assumed any contractual or other liability as to the benefits
to be provided thereunder, the value thereof, or the return
therefrom.  Such life insurance and/or annuity contracts shall be
considered investments of the Trust and all rights, privileges, options and
elections contained therein shall vest in the Trustee but shall be exercised,
assigned or otherwise disposed of as directed by the Committee.  The
insurance carrier under any such contract shall have full responsibility for the
management and control of the assets held thereunder.
 
Section
6.3.                                 Powers and Authority of
Trustee.  In addition to the powers elsewhere conferred upon
the Trustee under this Agreement and subject to Sections 6.2 and 6.4, the
Trustee shall be authorized and empowered, in its discretion, to exercise any
and all of the following rights, powers and privileges with respect to any cash,
securities or other properties held by the Trustee in trust hereunder, acting in
accordance with written instructions received from the Committee:
 
(a) To sell
any such property at such time and upon such terms and conditions as the Trustee
deems appropriate.  Such sales may be public or private, for cash or
credit, and may be made without notice or advertisement of any
kind.
 
(b) To
exchange, mortgage, pledge or lease any such property and to convey, transfer or
dispose of any such property on such terms and conditions as the Trustee deems
appropriate.
 
(c) To grant
options for the sale, transfer, exchange or disposal of any such
property.
 
(d) To
exercise all voting rights pertaining to any securities; to consent to or
request any action on the part of the issuer of any such securities; and to give
general or special proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of
substitution.
 
(e) To
consent to or participate in amalgamations, reorganizations, recapitalizations,
consolidations, mergers, liquidations or similar transactions with respect to
any securities, and to accept and to hold any other securities issued in
connection therewith.
 
(f) To
exercise any subscription rights or conversion privileges with respect to any
securities held in the Fund.
 
(g) To
collect and receive any and all money and other property of whatsoever kind or
nature due or owing or belonging to the Fund and to give full discharge and
acquittance therefor; and to extend the time of payment of any obligation at any
time owing to the Fund, as long as such extension is for a reasonable period and
continues to bear reasonable interest.
 
(h) To cause
any securities or other property to be registered in, or transferred to, the
individual name of the Trustee or in the name of one or more of its nominees, or
one or more nominees of any system for the centralized handling of securities,
but the books and records of the Trust shall at all times show that all such
investments are a part of the Fund.
 
(i) To
organize under the laws of any state a corporation for the purpose of acquiring
and holding title to any property which the Trustee is authorized to acquire
under this Agreement and to exercise with respect thereto any or all of the
powers set forth in this  Agreement.
 
(j) To
manage, operate, repair, improve, develop, preserve, mortgage or lease for any
period any real property or any oil, mineral or gas properties, royalties,
interest or rights held by it directly or through any corporation, either alone
or by joining with others, using other Trust assets for any of such purposes; to
modify, extend, renew, waive or otherwise adjust any or all of the provisions of
any such mortgage or lease; and to make provision for amortization of the
investment in or depreciation of the value of such property.
 
(k) To
settle, compromise, or submit to arbitration any claims, debts or damages due or
owing to or from the Trust; to commence or defend suits or legal proceedings
whenever, in its judgment, any interest of the Trust requires it; and to
represent the Trust in all suits or legal proceedings in any court of law or
equity or before any other body or tribunal, insofar as such suits or
proceedings relate to any property forming part of the Fund or to the
administration of the Fund.
 
(l) To borrow
money from itself or others for the purposes of the Trust.
 
(m) To
purchase, hold and sell interests or units of participation in any collective or
common trust fund established by the Trustee, including any such funds which may
be established in the future.
 
(n) Generally
to do all acts, whether or not expressly authorized which the Trustee deems
necessary or appropriate to perform its duties and discharge its
responsibilities under this Agreement.
 
(o) To retain
the services of outside legal counsel and/or other professionals as may be
necessary to assist it in connection with the administration of the Trust and/or
management or conservation of the Fund’s assets, including defending the Trust
from attack, claims or litigation regarding its assets.
 
(p) To pay
expenses of the Trust that are incurred in connection with the administration of
the Trust and/or the management of the Fund’s assets.
 
Section
6.4.                                 Investment of Fund by
Investment Manager.  
 
(a) Appointment of Investment
Manager.  The Committee may appoint one or more Investment
Managers, which may be the Trustee or an affiliate of the Trustee, to manage
(including the power to acquire and dispose of) all or any of the assets of the
Fund.  In the event of such appointment, the Committee shall establish
the portion of the assets of the Fund that shall be subject to the management of
any such Investment Manager and shall notify the Trustee in writing of such
appointment and the assets subject to the Investment Manager’s
discretion.  If there shall be more than one Investment Manager, the
portion of the Fund to be invested by each such Investment Manager shall be held
in a separate account and the powers and authority of each such Investment
Manager shall be divided as set forth in the instruments appointing such
Investment Managers.  To the maximum extent permitted by law, the
Trustee shall be protected in assuming that the appointment of an Investment
Manager remains in effect until it is otherwise notified by the Committee in
writing.  With respect to the assets over which an Investment Manager
has investment responsibility, the Investment Manager shall possess all of the
investment powers and responsibilities granted to the Committee hereunder, and
the Trustee shall invest and reinvest such assets pursuant to the direction of
the Investment Manager.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent
so provided in the document by which the Investment Manager accepts its
appointment, the Committee may:
 
(i)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments shall be
made or liquidated;
 
(ii)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments not be
made; and
 
(iii)           Require
that the Investment Manager obtain approval from the Committee prior to
acquiring or disposing of all or any assets under its control.
 
(b) Successor Investment
Manager.  The Committee may terminate its appointment of an
Investment Manager at any time and shall in writing notify the Trustee of such
termination, and may thereafter appoint a successor Investment Manager in the
same manner as provided in this Section 6.4.  Such successor
Investment Manager shall thereafter, until its appointment shall be terminated,
be deemed to be an Investment Manager for all purposes of this
Agreement.  In the event that a Committee does not exist, the Trustee
shall terminate any Investment Manager that is not an affiliate of the Trustee
and shall immediately appoint its affiliate, Evergreen Investments, as
Investment Manager.
 
(c) Effect of Appointment of
Investment Manager on Trustee.  So long as an Investment
Manager (other than the Trustee or one of its affiliates) is serving as such,
the Trustee shall be under no duty or obligation to review the assets comprising
any portion of the Fund managed by the Investment Manager, to make any
recommendations with respect to the investment or reinvestment thereof, or to
determine whether any direction received from any Investment Manager is proper
or within the terms of this Agreement or to monitor the activities of any
Investment Manager.  The Trustee shall have no liability or
responsibility to the Corporation, the Committee or any persons claiming any
interest in the Fund for acting without question on the direction of, or for
failing to act in the absence of any direction from, the Committee or any
Investment Manager unless the Trustee participated knowingly in, or knowingly
undertook to conceal, an act or omission of the Committee or of any Investment
Manager constituting a breach of its duties hereunder, knowing such act or
omission was a breach of such duties; provided, however, that the Trustee shall
not be deemed to have “participated” in a breach (i) by the Committee or to have
“knowledge” of any such breach as a result of accepting any property contributed
to the Trust in the Corporation’s discretion or retaining such property as an
investment for the Fund at the Committee’s direction; and (ii) by the Committee
or any Investment Manager for the purposes of this undertaking solely as a
result of the performance by the Trustee or its officers, employees or agents of
any custodial, reporting, recording, and bookkeeping functions with respect to
any assets of the Fund managed by any Investment Manager, or with respect to
which the Trustee has received directions from the Committee, or solely as a
result of settling purchase and sale transactions entered into or directed by
any Investment Manager or the Committee, or to have “knowledge” of any such
breach solely as a result of the information received by the Trustee or its
officers, employees or agents in the normal course in performing such functions,
or settling such transactions.  If the Trustee has actual knowledge of
a breach committed by an Investment Manager, it shall promptly notify the
Committee in writing thereof, and the Trustee, except as required by applicable
law, shall thereafter have no responsibility to remedy such breach.
 
Section
6.5.                                 Making Benefit
Payments.  Upon receipt of direction from the Corporation
consistent with certifications theretofore delivered to the Trustee pursuant to
Section 4.3, the Trustee shall promptly make benefit payments.  All
returns, records and forms required to be filed with the Federal, state and
local taxing authorities or delivered to each Participant and Beneficiary shall
be filed by the Corporation and/or Trustee in accordance with applicable law for
periods commencing with the Effective Date.  Except as provided in
this Agreement, all income taxes required to be paid by each Participant (and
any returns, records and forms required with respect to such taxes) shall be the
sole responsibility of such Participant.
 
Section
6.6.                                 Deposit of Contributions by
Trustee.  The Trustee shall accept for deposit in the Fund all
contributions in cash made by the Corporation under this Agreement and shall
promptly acknowledge receipt of same.  The Trustee shall have no
responsibility to determine or to question the accuracy or correctness of any
amounts so contributed.
 
Section
6.7.                                 Dealings with the
Trustee.  Persons dealing with the Trustee shall be under no
obligation to see to the proper application of any money paid or property
delivered to the Trustee or to inquire into the Trustee’s authority as to any
transaction.
 
Section
6.8.                                 Use of Fund Assets to Pay
Trust Expenses.  If the amount in the Expense Account is
insufficient to pay the expenses of the Trust, the Trustee may, in its
discretion or at the discretion of the Committee, use assets of the Fund (other
than those deposited in the Expense Account) to pay the expenses of the Trust,
including, without limitation, any (i) legal or other professional expenses
incurred in connection with the management, protection or conservation of the
assets of the Fund and (ii) insurance premiums that may be incurred with respect
to any fiduciary liability insurance that may be obtained by the Trust to cover
potential claims for indemnification that may be made by members of the
Committee pursuant to Section 10.3 of this Agreement.
 
ARTICLE
VII
 
DUTIES
OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
7.1.                                 General Duties of the
Trustee.  
 
(a) It shall
be the duty of the Trustee to protect and conserve all property received by it
hereunder which, together with the income and gains therefrom and additions
thereto, shall constitute the Fund.  The Trustee shall manage, invest
and reinvest the Fund, collect the income thereof, and make payments therefrom,
all as herein provided.
 
(b) The
Trustee shall discharge its duties with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence
under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like
capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of a like character and with like aims, and, in accordance with the
documents and instruments governing the Plan and the Trust.
 
Section
7.2.                                 Valuation of
Fund.  The Trustee shall value the Fund as of each Valuation
Date at current fair market value and shall report the results of such valuation
to the Committee.  The Trustee shall value the assets of the Trust at
market and on such other basis or bases (including, without limitation, cost) as
the Committee shall reasonably request.  The market value of the
assets shall be equal to the market value of the securities and other assets in
the Fund, plus cash, interest, dividends and other sums received and accrued but
not yet invested.  The market value of the securities and other assets
in the Fund shall be based on such market quotations and other information as
are available to the Trustee and as may in the Trustee’s discretion be
appropriate.
 
Section
7.3.                                 Reports and
Records.  The Trustee shall:
 
(a) Keep
accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and
other transactions in the Fund as it shall deem necessary and proper with
respect to its administration of the Trust, and permit inspection of such
accounts, records and assets of the Trust by any duly authorized representative
of the Corporation, the members of the Committee or the Participants during
regular business hours.
 
(b) Within
sixty (60) days (or such shorter period of time as the Corporation shall
reasonably request) following the close of the accounting year, and at such
other intervals as are mutually agreed to by the Trustee, the Corporation and
the Committee, the Trustee shall file with the Corporation, the Committee and,
unless the Corporation otherwise directs in writing, the Participants a written
account with respect to the transactions effected by the Trustee during such
accounting year or other period.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall file written objections, if any, with respect to the propriety of the
Trustee’s acts and transactions shown in such account within a period of ninety
(90) days from the date of filing such annual or other account.  If
within ninety (90) days after the receipt of the account or any amended account
the Corporation or the Committee has not signed and returned a counterpart to
the Trustee, nor filed with the Trustee notice of any objection to any act or
transaction of the Trustee, the account or amended account shall become an
account settled as between the Trustee and the Corporation and/or the
Committee.  If any objection has been filed, and if the Corporation
and/or the Committee are satisfied that it should be withdrawn or if the account
is adjusted to their satisfaction, the Corporation and/or the Committee shall in
writing filed with the Trustee signify their approval of the account, and the
account shall become an account settled as between the Trustee and the
Corporation and the Committee.
 
When an
account becomes an account settled, such account shall be finally settled, and
the Trustee shall be completely discharged and released, as if such account had
been settled and allowed by a judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction in an action or proceeding in which the Trustee, the Corporation,
the Committee and all persons having or claiming to have any interest in the
Fund or under the Plan were parties.
 
The
Trustee, the Corporation or the Committee shall have the right to apply at any
time to a court of competent jurisdiction for judicial settlement of any account
of the Trustee not previously settled as hereinabove provided.  In any
such action or proceeding it shall be necessary to join as parties only the
Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee (although the Trustee may also join
other parties as it deems appropriate), and any judgment or decree entered
therein shall be conclusive.
 
(c) Make such
periodic reports to the Corporation and the Committee as may be mutually agreed
to by the Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee, as
applicable.
 
(d) Prepare
and timely file such tax returns and such other reports and documents, together
with supporting data and schedules, as may be required of the Trustee by law,
with any taxing authority or any other government authority, whether local,
state or Federal.
 
(e) Provide
the Participants with copies of all such reports, returns, filings and documents
required by law, and cooperate with the Corporation in the filing of tax reports
and returns required to be filed by applicable law.
 
Section
7.4.                                 No Duty to Advance Funds or
to Administer the Plan.  The Trustee shall have no obligation
to advance its own funds for the purpose of fulfilling its responsibilities
under this Agreement, and its obligation to incur expenses shall at all times be
limited to amounts in the Trust available to be applied toward such
expenses.  The Trustee shall not be responsible in any respect for
administering the Plan.
 
Section
7.5.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Trustee.  The Trustee may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Committee.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received, or such earlier date as may be agreed to by the
Trustee and the Committee.  In addition, the Trustee may be removed by
the Committee at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Trustee.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Trustee and the Committee.
 
Upon the
Committee’s receipt of notice of such resignation or removal, the Committee
shall appoint a successor Trustee by written instrument, to serve commencing on
the effective date of the former Trustee’s resignation or removal.  If
a successor is not appointed by the Committee within sixty (60) days after the
issuance of notice of the Trustee’s resignation or removal, the Trustee may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of his or its
successor.  All expenses of the Trustee in connection with the
proceeding shall be allowed as an administration expense of the
Trust.  The Trustee shall continue to serve until a successor accepts
the Trust and receives delivery of the Fund.  The appointment of a
successor Trustee shall be effective when accepted in writing by the new
Trustee.  Upon the successor Trustee’s acceptance of appointment and
after the final account of the former Trustee has been settled, the former
Trustee shall transfer and deliver the Fund to such successor.  The
former Trustee shall exercise any instrument necessary or reasonably required by
the Committee or the successor Trustee to evidence the
transfer.  Moreover, the former Trustee shall deliver to the successor
Trustee the originals of all reports, records, documents, and other written
information in its possession regarding the Plan, the Fund, and the Participants
and shall deliver copies thereof to the Committee and to a person designated by
a majority of the persons who are Participants (or the Beneficiary of a deceased
Participant) on the date of such resignation or removal, and thereupon shall be
entitled to all unpaid compensation, fees and reimbursements to which it is
entitled under this Agreement and shall be relieved of all responsibilities and
duties under this Agreement.
 
All of
the provisions set forth herein with respect to the Trustee shall relate to each
successor with the same force and effect as if such successor had been
originally named as a Trustee hereunder.  Any successor Trustee shall
have the same powers, rights and duties as its predecessor and shall have the
same title to the Fund as its predecessor.
 
The
successor Trustee need not examine the records and accounts of any prior
Trustee.  The successor Trustee shall not be responsible for, and the
Corporation shall indemnify and defend the successor Trustee from, any claim or
liability resulting from any action or inaction of any prior Trustee or from any
other past event, or any condition existing at the time it becomes successor
Trustee.
 
ARTICLE
VIII
 
COMPENSATION,
IMMUNITIES
 
AND
INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
8.1.                                 Trustee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Trustee shall be entitled to such compensation
and fees for its services under this Agreement as shall be agreed upon from time
to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the Corporation shall
reimburse the Trustee for any expenses incurred by it, including, but not
limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the Trustee, and reasonable
fees for legal services rendered to the Trustee (whether or not rendered in
connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding).  Such
compensation, fees and reimbursement shall be paid to the Trustee pursuant to
the terms set forth at Section 8.2 of this Agreement.  The Trustee’s
entitlement to compensation, fees or reimbursement hereunder shall not be
affected by the resignation or removal of the Trustee or the termination of the
Trust.
 
Section
8.2.                                 Expense
Account.  The Corporation may from time to time make
contributions to the Fund to be held in an Expense Account and to be utilized to
pay the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and
other expenses of the Trust.  To the extent that there are monies in
the Expense Account, the Trustee shall utilize such Expense Account for payment
of the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee, for
payment of the indemnities referred to in Section 8.4 and 10.3, and for other
expenses of the Trust, and, in the absence of sufficient monies, shall seek
reimbursement from the Corporation.  In the event that the Corporation
shall fail or refuse to make such reimbursement within sixty (60) days of
demand, the Trustee may satisfy such obligations out of the other assets of the
Fund in such manner as the Trustee deems to be reasonable in the circumstances,
taking into account the amount of liquid assets, the anticipated needs to make
distributions to Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof), and such other
factors as the Trustee deems relevant.  If the Trustee satisfies any
obligations of the Corporation to pay fees and expenses from other Fund assets,
the Corporation shall immediately upon demand by the Trustee deposit into the
Trust an amount of cash equal to the amount paid from such assets if, at that
time, the Trustee could not replace such shares or assets with a cash amount
equal to the liquidation value of such shares or assets.  If such
funds are not deposited or assets replaced within sixty (60) days of such
demand, the Trustee may, in its sole and absolute discretion, commence legal
action against the Corporation for recovery of the amount paid out of the
Fund.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no amount held
in the Expense Account shall be used for purposes other than paying the
compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other
expenses of the Trust, and shall not be distributed to or for the benefit of the
Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof).
 
Section
8.3.                                 Immunities.  The
Trustee shall have the following privileges and immunities:
 
(a) The
Corporation and the Committee shall furnish the Trustee with instruments
evidencing individuals designated by the Corporation or the Committee, as the
case may be, who are empowered to give directions, statements, or certificates
to the Trustee.  A written direction, statement or certificate to the
Trustee signed by any such individual shall be deemed to be the direction,
statement or certificate of the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may
be, and the Trustee may rely upon such directions, statements, or certificates
to the extent not prohibited by law.  The Corporation and the
Committee shall furnish the Trustee from time to time with instruments
evidencing the termination of such designated individuals or the appointment of
new such designated individuals and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely upon
such instruments as evidence of the identity and authority of such designated
individuals and shall not be charged with notice of any change with respect
thereto until the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may be, has
furnished the Trustee with instruments relative to such change.
 
(b) The
Trustee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Trustee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Trustee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties it may
see fit.  In the event that the Trustee does delegate such ministerial
duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person to whom these
duties have been delegated.  The Trustee shall be reimbursed by the
Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal counsel, agents and
expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section 8.2 of this
Agreement.
 
Section
8.4.                                 Indemnity of the
Trustee.  
 
(a) The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds the Trustee harmless from and against
any and all losses, damages, costs, expenses or liabilities, including
reasonable fees for legal services and other costs of litigation, to which the
Trustee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by, incurred
in connection with, or in any way associated with this Agreement, including any
reasonable discretionary action which the Trustee may take under the Trust,
except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct of the Trustee.  If one or more liabilities shall arise, or
if the Corporation fails to indemnify the Trustee as provided herein, or both,
then the Trustee may engage counsel of the Trustee’s choice, but at the
Corporation’s expense, either to conduct the defense against such liabilities,
or to conduct such actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided
for herein, or to take both such actions.  The Trustee shall notify
the Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Trustee has engaged counsel
of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b) If the
Trustee shall be entitled to indemnification by the Corporation pursuant to this
Section 8.4, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification upon
demand, the Trustee may apply the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction of the
obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by the
Trustee against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in behalf of
the Trust.
 
Section
8.5.                                 Determination of Interests
in the Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal Proceedings.  The
interest of the Participants (and the Beneficiaries thereof) in the Fund shall
be determined in accordance with the terms of the Plan.  The Trustee
shall have no duty to question any direction given by the Corporation or the
Committee to the Trustee, including any direction advising the Trustee as to
such interests under the Plan.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall have authority to enforce this Agreement.  To protect the Fund
from the expenses which might otherwise be incurred, no person other than the
Corporation or the Committee may institute or maintain any action or proceeding
against the Trustee or the Fund, or join in any such action or proceeding, in
the absence of written authorization by the Corporation or the
Committee.   Except as otherwise provided in this Section 8.5, in
any action or proceeding affecting the Fund, the only necessary parties shall be
the Corporation, the Committee and the Trustee, and no other person shall be
entitled to any notice or process.
 
ARTICLE
IX
 
AMENDMENT
AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST
 
Section
9.1.                                 Amendment of
Agreement.  By a duly executed, written instrument delivered to
the Trustee and acknowledged in the same form as this Agreement, the Corporation
shall have the right at any time and from time to time to amend this Agreement
in whole or in part, except that (i) the duties and responsibilities of the
Trustee or the Committee shall not be increased, and the protections afforded to
the Trustee or the Committee shall not be impaired without the written consent
of the Trustee or the Committee, as the case may be; (ii) the protection
afforded with respect to obligations payable to or on behalf of the Participants
hereunder may not be impaired without the unanimous written consent of the
Participants; and (iii) the Corporation shall not have the power to revoke this
Trust or to revest title in itself to the assets comprising the
Fund.  Any such amendment shall be effective upon (a) delivery of such
amendment to the Trustee and the Committee, together with a certified copy of
the resolution of the Board of Directors of the Corporation or of its
Compensation Committee, as the case may be; and (b) endorsement by each the
Trustee and the Committee on such instrument upon receipt thereof, together with
any required consent or consents thereto.  No such amendment shall
adversely affect any benefits accrued under the Plan with respect to the
Participants.  All instruments amending this Agreement shall be noted
upon or kept attached to the executed original of this Agreement.
 
Section
9.2.                                 Termination of
Agreement.  This Agreement may not be terminated until the
liability of the Corporation for the payment of all benefits to all
Participants, and the Beneficiaries thereof, has been satisfied in full or until
such time as no funds remain on deposit in the Fund pursuant to this Agreement;
provided, however, that with the written consent of a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, the Committee may terminate this Agreement at any time with
respect to such consenting Participant or
Beneficiary.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this
Trust shall terminate no later than twenty-one (21) years after the death of the
last survivor of all of the Participants included in the original list of
Participants as constituted prior to this Restated and Amended Agreement, and
those persons now living who have been designated as Beneficiaries of such
Participants in accordance with the terms of the Plan.
 
ARTICLE
X
 
THE
COMMITTEE
 
Section
10.1.                                 Membership and Actions of
the Committee.  
 
(a) The
Committee shall at all times consist of a minimum of three (3) individuals, all
of whom shall be Participants.  Any member of the Committee may resign
upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the
Corporation.  Moreover, any member of the Committee may be removed at
any time by the Corporation.
 
(b) In the
event of a vacancy on the Committee, the other member(s) of the Committee shall
appoint a successor.  In the event that there is at any time no member
of the Committee then in office, successor members shall be appointed by the
Corporation.
 
(c) Any
action by the Committee shall require the written approval of at least a
majority of the members of the Committee.  A Committee member shall
not be liable hereunder for any act taken, or omitted to be taken, in good
faith, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct by such Committee member.
 
(d) All of
the provisions set forth herein with respect to a member of the Committee shall
relate to each successor with the same force and effect as if such successor had
been originally named as a member of the Committee.
 
(e) The
Committee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Committee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Committee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties as it
may see fit.  In the event that the Committee does delegate such
ministerial duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person
to whom these duties have been delegated.  The Committee members shall
be reimbursed by the Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal
counsel, agents and expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section
8.2 of this Agreement
 
Section
10.2.                                 Committee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Committee members shall be entitled to such
compensation and fees for their services under this Agreement as shall be agreed
upon from time to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the
Corporation shall reimburse the Committee members for any expenses incurred by
them, including, but not limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the
Committee members, and reasonable fees for legal services rendered to the
Committee (whether or not rendered in connection with a judicial or
administrative proceeding).  Such compensation, fees and reimbursement
shall be paid to the Committee members pursuant to the terms set forth at
Section 8.2 of this Agreement.  The Committee members’ entitlement to
compensation, fees or reimbursement hereunder shall not be affected by the
resignation or removal of any member or members of the Committee or the
termination of the Trust.
 
Section
10.3.                                 Indemnity of
Committee.  
 
(a) The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds each member of the Committee harmless
from and against any and all liabilities, including reasonable fees for legal
services and other costs of litigation, to which each such member of the
Committee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by,
incurred in connection with, or in any way associated with this Trust or
Agreement, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or
willful misconduct of such member of the Committee.  If one or more
liabilities shall arise, or if the Corporation fails to indemnify such member of
the Committee as provided herein, or both, then the Committee member may engage
counsel of the Committee member’s choice, but at the Corporation’s expense,
either to conduct the defense against such liabilities, or to conduct such
actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided for herein, or to
take both such actions.  The Committee member shall notify the
Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Committee member has so engaged
counsel of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b) If a
Committee member shall be entitled to indemnification pursuant to this Section
10.3, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification upon demand,
the Trustee shall satisfy any indemnity to a Committee member pursuant to this
Section 10.3 out of the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction of the
obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by the
Committee member against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in
behalf of the Trust.
 
ARTICLE
XI
 
MISCELLANEOUS
 
Section
11.1.                                 Governing
Law.  This Trust is created and accepted in the State of
Delaware.  All questions pertaining to the validity or construction of
this Agreement and the acts and transactions of the parties hereto and their
respective successors shall be determined in accordance with the laws of the
State of Texas, except as to matters governed by Federal law.
 
Section
11.2.                                 No Effect on
Employment.  Nothing contained in this Agreement shall create,
or be construed or interpreted to create, any new or additional obligations on
the part of the Corporation or its affiliates to retain any person in its employ
or interfere in any way with the right of the Corporation to discharge any
employee.
 
Section
11.3.                                 Successors.  This
Agreement shall be binding upon, and the powers herein granted to the
Corporation and the Trustee, respectively, shall be exercisable by, the
respective successors and assigns of the Corporation and the
Trustee.
 
Section
11.4.                                 Severability.  Should
any provision of this Agreement be determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unlawful or unenforceable, such determination shall not
adversely affect the remaining provisions of this Agreement, unless it shall
make impossible the maintenance or operation of the Trust for its intended
purposes.  To the extent any provision of this Agreement is determined
to be unlawful or unenforceable, this Agreement shall be construed to be carried
out to the fullest extent possible in a lawful and enforceable
manner.
 
Section
11.5.                                 Incorporation of Plan as
Part of Agreement.  The Plan is expressly incorporated herein
and made a part hereof with the same force and effect as if fully set
forth.  The Corporation shall deliver to the Trustee a copy of all
amendments to the Plan hereafter adopted.
 
Section
11.6.                                   Execution in
Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of
counterparts, each of which shall be considered an original and said
counterparts shall constitute but one and the same instrument.
 
Section
11.7.                                 Effect of Divisions and
Captions.  The division of this Agreement into articles,
paragraphs, sections and subsections and the use of captions are solely for
convenience and shall have no legal effect in construing the provisions of this
Agreement.
 
Section
11.8.                                 Gender and
Number.  Whenever the masculine, feminine, or neuter gender is
used inappropriately in this Agreement, this Agreement shall be read as if the
appropriate gender was used, and, unless the context otherwise requires, the
singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
 
Section
11.9.                                 Mistake of
Fact.  A misstatement or other mistake of fact relating to this
Agreement shall be corrected when it becomes known, and the Committee shall make
such adjustment on account thereof as it considers equitable and practicable;
provided that no adjustment under this Section 11.9 shall be made which violates
any provision of section 409A of the Code or any guidance issued
thereunder.
 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the Corporation, the Trustee and the Committee have entered in
to this Agreement as of NOVEMBER 17, 2008, effective as of the Effective
Date.
 
CORPORATION:
 
AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.,
a Delaware corporation
 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Kenneth
W. Wimberly, Corporate Secretary
 

 
TRUSTEE:
 
WACHOVIA
BANK,                                           NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION


Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;

Name:                                                                        

Title:                                                                        
 

 
COMMITTEE:
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Gerard J.
Arpey
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Thomas W.
Horton
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Jeffrey
J. Brundage
 

 
Attest:                                                           By:                                                                       
0;
Gary F.
Kennedy
 



EX-10.129
20
ex10129.htm
TRUST AGREEMENT UNDER SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM FOR OFFICERS PARTICIPATING IN DC PLAN

ex10129.htm
























TRUST
AGREEMENT
UNDER
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.
PARTICIPATING IN THE $UPER $AVER PLUS
PLAN



Amended
and Restated effective June 1, 2007
ARTICLE
I
 



DAL02:442056.6
003154.0122 

 



 






 



TABLE OF
CONTENTS

 
 
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    1.1.


Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.2.


Actuary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.3.


Beneficiary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.4.


Code 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.5.


Committee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.6.


Compensation
      Committee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.7.


Corporation 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.8.


Expense
      Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    1.9.


Fund 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.10.Investment
      Manager

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.11.Participant

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.12.Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.13.$uper $aver Plus
      Plan

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.14.Trust

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.15.Trustee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 1.16.Valuation
    Date

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
II CREATION, PURPOSE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    2.1.


Purpose of the Trust; Separate
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    2.2.


Administration of the
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    2.3.


Irrevocable; Not Subject to
      Creditor Claims 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    2.4.


Secured Interest; Separate
      Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
III ACCOUNTS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    3.1.


Fund and
      Accounts. 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.2.


Written Certifications Provided
      by Corporation to the Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.3.


Benefits
      Payable 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.4.


Account
      Adjustment 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.5.


Maintenance of
      Accounts 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.6.


Taxability of the Trust and the
      Participants 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.7.


Accumulation/Distribution of
      Trust Income 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    3.8.


Contributions by the Corporation
      for Income Taxes 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IV CONTRIBUTIONS, CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    4.1.


Contributions to the
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    4.2.


Provision of Benefits is Binding
      Obligation of Corporation 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    4.3.


Provision of Reports and Written
      Certifications by the Corporation to the
    Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    4.4.


Distributions to
      Participants 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE V
ACTUARY [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    5.1.


Determination of Corporation’s
      Fund Contributions by Actuary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    5.2.


Resignation/Removal of
      Actuary 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VI INVESTMENTS AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    6.1.


Fund Held in
      Trust 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.2.


Types of
      Investments 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.3.


Powers and Authority of
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.4.


Investment of Fund by Investment
      Manager 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.5.


Making Benefit
      Payments 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.6.


Deposit of Contributions by
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.7.


Dealings with the
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    6.8.


Use of Fund Assets to Pay Trust
      Expenses 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VII DUTIES OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    7.1.


General Duties of the
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.2.


Valuation of
      Fund 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.3.


Reports and
      Records 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.4.


No Duty to Advance Funds or to
      Administer the Plan 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    7.5.


Resignation/Removal of
      Trustee 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
VIII COMPENSATION, IMMUNITIES  AND INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    8.1.


Trustee Compensation and
      Expenses 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.2.


Expense
      Account 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.3.


Immunities 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.4.


Indemnity of the
      Trustee. 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    8.5.


Determination of Interests in the
      Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal
    Proceedings 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
IX AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST [INSERT PAGE NUMBER]




 
      


Section
    9.1.


Amendment of
      Agreement 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








 
      


Section
    9.2.


Termination of
      Agreement 


[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE X
THE COMMITTEE [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section 10.1.Membership and Actions of the
      Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 10.2.Committee Compensation and
      Expenses

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 10.3.Indemnity of
      Committee

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]




 
ARTICLE
XI MISCELLANEOUS [INSERT PAGE
NUMBER]




Section 11.1.Governing
    Law

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.2.No Effect on
      Employment

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.3.Successors

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.4.Severability

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.5.Incorporation of Plan as Part of
      Agreement

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.6.Execution in
      Counterparts

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.7.Effect of Divisions and
      Captions

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.8.Gender and
      Number

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]








Section 11.9.Mistake of
      Fact

 

[INSERT PAGE
  NUMBER]






ARTICLE
I
 


 



 






 



TRUST
AGREEMENT
UNDER
SUPPLEMENTAL
EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
FOR
OFFICERS OF AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC.
PARTICIPATING IN THE $UPER $AVER PLUS
PLAN
 
THIS
AGREEMENT (the or this “Agreement”) was made and adopted effective as of the
15th day of September, 2005, by and between AMERICAN AIRLINES, INC. (the
“Corporation”), a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State
of Delaware, and WACHOVIA BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION (the “Trustee”), a national
association organized and existing under the laws of the United States, and the
individuals constituting the Committee described in Section 10.1 (the
“Committee”).  By this instrument, the Corporation hereby amends and
restates the Agreement in the entirety, effective as of June 1, 2007 (the
“Effective Date”).
 
RECITALS
 
WHEREAS, in January 1985, the
Board of Directors of AMR Corporation
established the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of
American Airlines, Inc., as subsequently amended (the “Plan”), for the purpose
of paying retirement benefits to certain officers of the Corporation who are participants in the Plan
(the “Participants”), and the Plan was subsequently amended to provide
retirement benefits to certain officers of the Corporation who are participants
in the Plan (the “Participants”) and in the $uper $aver Plus Plan (the “$uper
$aver Plus Plan”); and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation has
established an irrevocable trust to fund certain retirement benefits of the
Participants of the Plan who are participants in the $uper $aver Plus Plan;
and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires the Trustee to continue to undertake the responsibility for the
protection and conservation of the assets of the Trust, under the terms of the
Agreement; the Trustee is willing to continue such responsibility, and the
Corporation has delivered assets to the Trustee to hold in trust for the purpose
of accumulating funds to pay benefits under the Plan as they become due and
payable; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
desires that the Committee under the Plan be responsible for the administration
of the Trust, and the Committee has undertaken the responsibility and duties of
the Committee pursuant to the terms of the Agreement; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporation
intends the Trust to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax purposes,
whereby the Participants will be subject to current taxation on the funds held
in the Trust; and
 
WHEREAS, the trust established
by this Agreement is not intended to be a “grantor trust” pursuant to sections
671 through 679 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”),
but is intended to be a taxable trust pursuant to section 641 et seq. of the Code;
and
 
WHEREAS, subsequently to the
Effective Date, Revenue Ruling 2007-48 has been issued by the U.S. Treasury
Department, and the Corporation desires to update the Agreement so that the
Trust continues to operate as a secular trust for Federal income tax
purposes;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in
consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the Corporation, the
Trustee and the Committee hereby amend and restate the Agreement in the
entirety, to provide as follows:
 
ARTICLE
I                                
 
DEFINITIONS
 
Each word
or phrase used herein which is in quotations shall have the meaning set forth in
this Article I, unless a different meaning is clearly required by
context.
 
Section
1.1.                                 Account.  “Account”
means the separate account established and maintained under the Fund with
respect to each Participant to provide a source of funds for the benefits
payable by the Corporation to, or with respect to, each such Participant under
the Plan who is also a participant under the $uper $aver Plus Plan.
 
Section
1.2.                                 Actuary.  “Actuary”
means the then acting actuary or firm of actuaries employed by the Corporation
to advise the Corporation with respect to contributions to be made under the
Plan.  The initial Actuary shall be Towers, Perrin, Forster &
Crosby, Inc. and Subsidiaries.  
 
Section
1.3.                                 Beneficiary.  “Beneficiary”
holds the identical definition of the term as defined in the Plan.
 
Section
1.4.                                 Code.  “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
Section
1.5.                                 Committee.  “Committee”
means the committee of persons to whom the Corporation has delegated the
responsibility of the Trust’s administration.
 
Section
1.6.                                 Compensation
Committee.  “Compensation Committee” means the compensation
committee of the Board of Directors of AMR Corporation.  
 
Section
1.7.                                 Corporation.  “Corporation”
means American Airlines, Inc. and any
successor thereto, or to the business thereof, by whatever form or manner
resulting.
 
Section
1.8.                                 Expense
Account.  “Expense Account” means
a separate account of the Fund whereby the Corporation may make
contributions to be utilized by the Trustee to pay the compensation, fees and
expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other expenses of the
Trust.
 
Section
1.9.                                 Fund.  “Fund”
means the money and property held by the Trustee under this
Agreement.
 
Section
1.10.                                 Investment
Manager.  “Investment Manager” means the then acting manager of
all or any of the assets of the Fund that is appointed by the Committee to
exercise investment responsibility with respect to all or such portion of the
Fund as determined by the Committee.
 
Section
1.11.                                 Participant.  “Participant”
means an
“Active Funding Participant” in the Plan (as defined at Section 2.1(b) of the
Plan) who is a Participant in the $uper $aver Plus
Plan.  
 
Section
1.12.                                 Plan.  “Plan”
means the Supplemental Executive Retirement Program for Officers of American
Airlines, Inc. originally effective January 1, 1985, and as amended from time to
time, including certain retirement benefits heretofore authorized and which may
hereafter be authorized to be payable to certain employees of the
Corporation.  
 
Section
1.13.                                 $uper $aver Plus
Plan.  “$uper $aver Plus Plan”
means Supplement 9 of the $uper $aver A 401(k) Capital Accumulation Plan for
Employees of Participating AMR Corporation Subsidiaries originally effective
July 1, 1988, and as amended from time to time.  
 
Section
1.14.                                 Trust.  “Trust” means the trust provided for
under this Agreement.
 
Section
1.15.                                 Trustee.  “Trustee”
means the then acting trustee of the Trust.  The initial trustee of
the Trust is Wachovia Bank, National Association.
 
Section
1.16.                                 Valuation
Date.  “Valuation Date” means (i) the last business day of each
calendar quarter; (ii) in the case of a Participant who retires or whose
employment with the Corporation is terminated for any reason, the last business
day of the calendar month coincident with or immediately preceding the date of
such retirement or termination; and (iii) each other date or dates specified by
the Committee to the Trustee for the valuation of the Fund and adjustment of
Accounts.
 
ARTICLE
II                                
 
CREATION,
PURPOSE AND
 
ADMINISTRATION
OF THE TRUST
 
Section
2.1.                                 Purpose of the Trust;
Separate Trust.  This Trust is established by the Corporation,
the Trustee and the Committee for the purpose of accumulating funds to pay
benefits under the Plan.  Payments from the Fund to Participants or
their Beneficiaries shall be in discharge of the Corporation’s liability under
the terms of the Plan to such Participants, to the extent such benefits are paid
from the Fund.  The Corporation intends that each Account established
pursuant to Article III be treated as a separate trust designed to satisfy, in
whole or in part, the Corporation’s liability under the Plan to each Participant
with respect to whom such Account is maintained.
 
Section
2.2.                                 Administration of the
Trust.  The Committee shall be solely responsible for the
administration of the Trust.  The Committee shall, upon request of the
Trustee, furnish the Trustee with such reasonable information as is necessary or
appropriate for the Trustee to carry out its responsibilities under this
Agreement, and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the
information received from the Committee.  The Corporation shall be
responsible for the administration of the Plan.  The Corporation shall,
upon request of either the Committee or the Trustee, furnish each of the
Committee and the Trustee with such reasonable information as each of the
Committee or the Trustee shall deem necessary or appropriate to carry out the
intent and purposes of the Trust, and each of the Committee and the Trustee
shall be entitled to rely conclusively on the information received from the
Corporation, unless, in the case of the Trustee, the Committee has informed the
Trustee in writing not to rely on such information.  
 
Section
2.3.                                 Irrevocable; Not Subject to
Creditor Claims.  Subject to the provisions of Section 9.2
hereof, this Trust shall be irrevocable.  In addition, the Fund shall
not be subject to the claims of the creditors of the Corporation in a bankruptcy
or other insolvency proceeding under Federal or state law, but shall be
maintained for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to Participants under
the Plan who are participants in the $uper $aver
Plus Plan.  The right to receive benefits under the Plan
through this Agreement may not be anticipated, alienated, sold, transferred,
assigned, pledged, encumbered or subjected to any charge or legal process, and
the non-alienation provisions of Sections 8.1 and 8.2 of the Plan are hereby
incorporated in the entirety by this reference.  
 
Section
2.4.                                 Secured Interest; Separate
Account.  Each Participant shall have a secured interest in the
Account maintained in the Fund with respect to the benefits payable under the
Plan.  Each Participant’s Account will be maintained as a “separate
account” within the meaning of section 404(a)(5) of the Code.  The
Corporation agrees that during the existence of the Trust, the Corporation shall
not permit or cause, or amend this Agreement to permit or cause, the Fund, or
any part thereof, to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the payment
of benefits under the Plan for Participants and their
Beneficiaries.  
 
ARTICLE
III                                
 
ACCOUNTS
 
Section
3.1.                                 Fund and
Accounts.
 
(a)           The
Fund under this Trust shall consist of such sums of money or other property (and
the earnings thereon) as shall from time to time be paid or delivered to the
Trustee and held by it pursuant to the terms of this
Agreement.  
 
(b)           Contributions
to the Trust with respect to the benefits of Participants shall be credited to
Accounts as provided in Section 3.4.  At the time the Corporation
makes an initial contribution to the Trust with respect to the benefits of a
Participant, it shall notify the Trustee of such fact and an Account shall be
established by the Trustee under the Fund.  The Corporation shall
provide the Trustee with such information or reports as are necessary to credit
contributions to the Account maintained with respect to each Participant in
accordance with Section 4.3 hereof.
 
Section
3.2.                                 Written Certifications
Provided by Corporation to the Trustee.  Subject to this
Section 3.2, the Trustee shall have responsibility for the maintenance of
Account records, including, without limitation, the responsibility for making
determinations regarding the adjustment of such Accounts under Section 3.4 hereof.  The Corporation shall
provide the Trustee from time to time, but not less frequently than annually,
with written certifications pursuant to Section 4.3 hereof concerning the amount
and form of benefits payable to each Participant under the Plan and the time or
times when such benefits shall become payable.  Each such
certification shall state that it is made in accordance with the terms of the
Plan,
is binding on the Trustee, and may not be modified, amended or rescinded in any
manner whatsoever, except by a subsequent certification which complies with the
requirements of Section 4.3
hereof.  The Trustee shall not be bound by, and shall ignore,
any such certification which does not comply with the requirements of Section
4.3 hereof.  The Trustee shall
make payments to Participants and Beneficiaries strictly in accordance with the
terms of Section 4.4 hereof and shall have no responsibility or duty to evaluate
such certifications or other reports with respect to their validity, accuracy or
completeness or to make any inquiry regarding the data or information contained
therein.  If the Corporation does not provide the Trustee with the
information necessary to establish an Account pursuant to this Section 3.2 and
Section 4.3 herein, the Trustee shall
deposit any contributions for which it has not received information into the
Expense Account, and shall maintain the contributions in the Expense Account until it has received such
information.  
 
Section
3.3.                                 Benefits
Payable.  Any benefits becoming payable to a Participant or
Beneficiary under the Plan shall be paid from the Fund and charged against the
Account maintained with respect to the benefits of such
Participant.  No payment shall be made from the Fund to or with
respect to a Participant to the extent that such payment would exceed the
balance then remaining credited in the Account maintained with respect to such
Participant.
 
Section
3.4.                                 Account
Adjustment.  As of each Valuation Date, and based upon the
results of its valuation of the Fund as of such Valuation Date, the Committee
shall direct the Trustee to adjust Accounts to reflect realized and unrealized
gains, income and losses and chargeable expenses of the Fund on an accrual basis
since the preceding Valuation Date, in accordance with the provisions of this
Section 3.4.  The Account will be adjusted to reflect payment of
taxes paid by the Trust with respect to such contributions.  The
amount creditable to the Account of a Participant as of a Valuation Date
selected by the Committee after payment of any benefits and/or applicable
withholding taxes shall not exceed the Participant’s vested accrued benefit
under the Plan as of such date, as determined by the Committee, in its sole and
absolute discretion.  The allocation of any amounts creditable as
contributions, income, losses and realized or unrealized appreciation to the
Account of the Participant shall be limited so that the balance as of such
Valuation Date does not exceed the Participant’s accrued benefit under the
Plan.  Any excess shall rather be allocable to other known or
reasonably anticipated liabilities arising under the Plan and/or the
Trust.  The Trustee shall be under no obligation to question such
allocation adjustment.  
 
Section
3.5.                                 Maintenance of
Accounts.  Once established, an Account shall be maintained
with respect to the benefits of each Participant until it has been liquidated
through distribution to the Participant, or a Beneficiary thereof.
 
Section
3.6.                                 Taxability of the Trust and
the Participants.  
 
(a)           It
is intended that the Trust not constitute a “grantor trust” under sections 671
through 679 of the Code, and, notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to
the contrary, the Corporation, as the grantor of the Trust, shall not possess
any power under this Agreement that would cause the Trust to constitute a
“grantor trust.”  It is intended that the Trust constitute a taxable
entity under sections 641 et.
seq. of the Code.  Accordingly, the Trustee acknowledges and
agrees that the Corporation is not the owner of the Trust for Federal income tax
purposes.  Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the
contrary, none of the powers granted to the Trustee shall be construed to enable
the Corporation, the Trustee or anyone else, to buy, exchange or otherwise deal
with the Fund for less than adequate and full consideration in money or money’s
worth, or to enable the Corporation, the Trustee or any entity in which the
Corporation, the Trustee, or both, have a substantial interest, to borrow from
the Fund, directly or indirectly, without adequate interest or security; no one
but the Trustee (or the Investment Manager) may vote or direct the vote of any
corporate shares or other securities of the Trust, or control the Trust’s
investments or reinvestments by substituting other property of equal value; the
Trustee is not required to surrender Trust assets upon being tendered substitute
assets, regardless of the relative values of the assets involved.
 
(b)           The
Trust is a funded trust and, as such, it is intended that each Participant in
respect of whom an Account is maintained be taxed in accordance with section
402(b) of the Code.  Consequently, contributions to the Trust by the
Corporation shall be taxable to the Participants in accordance with section
402(b)(1) of the Code.  (The Corporation shall take a deduction for
the amount of such contributions, for United States Federal income tax purposes,
in accordance with section 404(a)(5) of the Code.)  Except as is
necessary to satisfy any Trust obligation, if any, to withhold taxes and to pay
over such withheld amounts to the appropriate taxing authorities, the Trust
shall not have any obligation or liability for the payment of any income,
estate, gift or employment taxes payable by a Participant or Beneficiary, or the
estate of a Participant or Beneficiary, with respect to benefits payable under
the Plan.  The Trustee shall
have the responsibility to file any tax returns, reports or other information as
may be required by any Federal, state, local or other taxing or governmental
authority with respect to the Trust, its income and distributions and
withholding therefrom.  Pursuant to Internal Revenue Service Revenue
Ruling 2007-48 or successor guidance thereto, the Corporation, if required to
withhold employment taxes at the time of contribution, shall withhold and
transmit such taxes.  The Corporation and the Trustee shall comply as
required by law to achieve proper reporting in connection with tax reporting
requirements.
 
Section
3.7.                                 Accumulation/Distribution of
Trust Income.  All of the income and gain derived from the Fund
shall be accumulated and allocated to the Accounts of the Participants pursuant
to Section 3.4 hereof; provided, however,
that the Committee shall have the right, in its sole and absolute discretion, to
instruct the Trustee in writing to distribute all or a portion of such income
and gain credited to the Participants’ respective Accounts to the
Participants.
 
Section
3.8.                                 Contributions by the
Corporation for Income Taxes.  If the income and gain derived
by the Trust in any taxable year is subject to United States Federal, state or
local income tax (e.g., because the Committee has elected not to distribute such
income and gain to the Participants) the Trustee shall pay such income taxes
from the Fund except to the extent that the Corporation contributes to the Trust
an amount to enable the Trustee to pay such income taxes.  To the
extent such taxes are paid from the Fund, the Accounts shall be reduced on a pro
rata basis, subject to Section 3.4.  An amount contributed for such
purpose shall be allocated to each respective applicable Account and the payment
shall be charged against such applicable Account.
 
ARTICLE
IV                                
 
CONTRIBUTIONS,
CERTIFICATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
 
Section
4.1.                                 Contributions to the
Trust.  The Corporation may make such contributions to the Trust as it
shall determine in its sole and absolute discretion, are necessary to provide
benefits to the Participants under the Plan and for the Trust to pay any income
taxes due on its income and gain (as provided in Section 3.8 hereof).  Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained herein, no person, including, without limitation, the
Trustee, the Actuary, any Participant or former Participant, or any Beneficiary
thereof, shall have the right to require the Corporation to make any
contribution to the Trust or to question the accuracy or correctness of any
amounts so contributed.
 
Section
4.2.                                 Provision of Benefits is
Binding Obligation of Corporation.  Except to the extent that
benefits to which a Participant, or the Beneficiary thereof, is entitled under
the Plan are actually paid from the Fund, nothing contained in this Agreement
shall relieve the Corporation of its obligations under the Plan to or with respect to such
Participant.
 
Section
4.3.                                 Provision of Reports and
Written Certifications by the Corporation to the Trustee.  The
Corporation shall maintain, and furnish the Trustee with, such reports,
documents, and information as shall be required by the Trustee to carry out its
obligations under this Agreement, including, without limitation, written reports
setting forth the identity of Participants with respect to whose benefits
contributions are made to the Trust and the amount of such contributions, and
the written certifications regarding Participants’ benefits described
below.  At or about the time an Account is established with respect to
the benefits of a Participant, the Corporation shall furnish the Trustee with a
written certification which includes the amount of the Participant’s benefits,
the time or times as of which such benefits shall become payable, the present
value of such benefits as of a specific date or dates, any conditions which must
be satisfied in order for the Participant to become entitled to such benefits,
and the identity of the Participant’s Beneficiary and the specific conditions
under which benefits shall become payable to such Beneficiary.  Such
certifications may be revised by the Corporation at any time, and from time to
time, to reflect, among other things, entitlement of the Participant to
increased benefits or an earlier time of payment under the Plan and to reflect
changes in Beneficiary designations by the Participant.  No
certification shall be revised, nor shall the Trustee be bound by or honor any
such revision, to decrease the benefits of a Participant or to impose additional
or more stringent conditions with respect to a Participant’s eligibility for
benefits.  The Trustee shall rely on the most recent reports,
documents, information, and certifications furnished to it by the Corporation
which comply with the preceding sentence.
 
Section
4.4.                                 Distributions to
Participants.  At such time as a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, is entitled to the receipt of benefits from the Plan, he or
she shall be entitled to receive from the Account maintained with respect to
such Participant the amount in cash or property, as the case may be, to which he
or she is entitled under the terms of the Plan taking into account any prior
distributions made to the Participant under the Plan.  The Trustee
also shall make payments from the Fund to each Participant or Beneficiary
entitled thereto under the Plan in accordance with Section 3.7 hereof upon
written direction from the Committee.  All distributions made by the
Trust shall be in accordance with the most recent certification filed with the
Trustee pursuant to and in compliance with Section 4.3 hereof promptly upon receipt of written
direction from the Corporation or upon receipt of evidence submitted by the
Participant satisfactory to the Trustee that the Participant has retired or
otherwise terminated his employment with the Corporation, voluntarily or
otherwise.  The Trustee shall not be required to engage in its own
independent investigation regarding any such payment, but shall provide the
Corporation with written confirmation of the fact and amount of such payment
after it is made.
 
ARTICLE
V
 
ACTUARY
 
Section
5.1.                                 Determination of
Corporation’s Fund Contributions by Actuary.  The Actuary shall
calculate from time to time the amount of the contributions that it estimates
should be made to the Fund by the Corporation for the purpose to accumulate
funds to provide benefits under the Plan; provided, however that, pursuant to
Section 4.1 hereof, the Committee may determine, in its sole and absolute
discretion, whether, and to what extent, the Corporation shall be required to
make contributions to the Fund.  
 
Section
5.2.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Actuary.  The Actuary may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Corporation.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received.  The Actuary may be removed by the
Corporation at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Actuary.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Actuary and the Corporation.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, in no event will any such resignation or removal be effective
until a successor Actuary has been appointed upon such resignation or
removal.  Upon the Corporation’s receipt of notice of such resignation
or removal, the Corporation shall appoint a successor Actuary, by written
instrument, to serve commencing on the effective date of the former Actuary’s
resignation or removal.  If a successor is not appointed by the
Corporation within sixty (60) days after the issuance of notice of the Actuary’s
resignation or removal, the Committee shall appoint the successor Actuary.

 
ARTICLE
VI                                
 
INVESTMENTS
AND POWERS OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
6.1.                                 Fund Held in
Trust.  The Fund shall be held in trust by the
Trustee.  The sole responsibilities, powers and duties of the Trustee
with respect to the Trust and the Fund shall be as set forth in this
Agreement.  The Trustee shall be a directed trustee only, with no
discretionary authority or responsibility, with respect to the Fund except to
the extent that it has discretion within investment guidelines provided to it in
writing by the Committee.  
 
Section
6.2.                                 Types of
Investments.  
 
(a)           Except
as otherwise provided in Section 6.4
hereof, the Trustee shall invest and reinvest the assets of the Trust,
without distinction between principal and income, pursuant to investment
guidelines delivered to it in a manner which has the primary purpose of
preservation of principal and liquidity of the Fund and, secondarily, to the
extent consistent with the goal to preserve principal and liquidity of the Fund,
which maximizes the income of the Fund.  The Trustee is expressly
authorized to invest the Fund, or any portion thereof, in any property, real,
personal or mixed, wherever situated, and whether or not productive of income or
consisting of wasting assets, including, without limitation, common and
preferred stocks, mutual funds, bonds, notes, debentures, securities convertible
into common stock, leaseholds, mortgages (including, without limitation, any
collective or part interest in any bond and mortgage or note and mortgage),
interest-bearing accounts and certificates of deposit, oil, mineral or gas
properties, royalties, interests or rights (including equipment pertaining
thereto), equipment trust certificates, investment trust certificates, savings
bank deposits, and commercial paper, provided that the assets of the Trust shall
at no time be invested in the equity or debt securities, whether secured or
unsecured, of the Corporation, its affiliates or its trades or businesses except
to the extent such security may be held in a mutual fund.  Pending
such investment and reinvestment, the Trustee may temporarily invest and
reinvest the funds, at its discretion, in any marketable short and medium term
fixed-income securities, United States Treasury Bills, other short and medium
term government obligations, commercial paper, other money market instruments
and part interests in any one or more of the foregoing or money market mutual
funds, or may maintain cash balances consistent with the liquidity needs of the
Trust as determined by the Trustee.
 
(b)           The
Trustee shall, at the direction of the Committee, purchase life insurance and/or
annuity contracts providing flexible funding or similar vehicles or for the
investment of assets in separate accounts invested in any securities and other
property including real estate, regardless of whether or not the insurance
carrier shall have assumed any contractual or other liability as to the benefits
to be provided thereunder, the value thereof, or the return
therefrom.  Such life insurance and/or annuity contracts shall be
considered investments of the Trust and all rights, privileges, options and
elections contained therein shall vest in the Trustee but shall be exercised,
assigned or otherwise disposed of as directed by the Committee.  The
insurance carrier under any such contract shall have full responsibility for the
management and control of the assets held thereunder.
 
Section
6.3.                                 Powers and Authority of
Trustee.  In addition to the powers elsewhere conferred upon
the Trustee under this Agreement and subject to Sections 6.2 and 6.4 hereof, the Trustee shall be authorized and
empowered, in its discretion, to exercise any and all of the following rights,
powers and privileges with respect to any cash, securities or other properties
held by the Trustee in trust hereunder, acting in accordance with written
instructions received from the Committee:
 
(a)           To
sell any such property at such time and upon such terms and conditions as the
Trustee deems appropriate.  Such sales may be public or private, for
cash or credit, and may be made without notice or advertisement of any
kind.
 
(b)           To
exchange, mortgage, pledge or lease any such property and to convey, transfer or
dispose of any such property on such terms and conditions as the Trustee deems
appropriate.
 
(c)           To
grant options for the sale, transfer, exchange or disposal of any such
property.
 
(d)           To
exercise all voting rights pertaining to any securities; to consent to or
request any action on the part of the issuer of any such securities; and to give
general or special proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of
substitution.
 
(e)           To
consent to or participate in amalgamations, reorganizations, recapitalizations,
consolidations, mergers, liquidations or similar transactions with respect to
any securities, and to accept and to hold any other securities issued in
connection therewith.
 
(f)           To
exercise any subscription rights or conversion privileges with respect to any
securities held in the Fund.
 
(g)           To
collect and receive any and all money and other property of whatsoever kind or
nature due or owing or belonging to the Fund and to give full discharge and
acquittance therefor; and to extend the time of payment of any obligation at any
time owing to the Fund, as long as such extension is for a reasonable period and
continues to bear reasonable interest.
 
(h)           To
cause any securities or other property to be registered in, or transferred to,
the individual name of the Trustee or in the name of one or more of its
nominees, or one or more nominees of any system for the centralized handling of
securities, but the books and records of the Trust shall at all times show that
all such investments are a part of the Fund.
 
(i)           To
organize under the laws of any state a corporation for the purpose of acquiring
and holding title to any property which the Trustee is authorized to acquire
under this Agreement and to exercise with respect thereto any or all of the
powers set forth in this  Agreement.
 
(j)           To
manage, operate, repair, improve, develop, preserve, mortgage or lease for any
period any real property or any oil, mineral or gas properties, royalties,
interest or rights held by it directly or through any corporation, either alone
or by joining with others, using other Trust assets for any of such purposes; to
modify, extend, renew, waive or otherwise adjust any or all of the provisions of
any such mortgage or lease; and to make provision for amortization of the
investment in or depreciation of the value of such property.
 
(k)           To
settle, compromise, or submit to arbitration any claims, debts or damages due or
owing to or from the Trust; to commence or defend suits or legal proceedings
whenever, in its judgment, any interest of the Trust requires it; and to
represent the Trust in all suits or legal proceedings in any court of law or
equity or before any other body or tribunal, insofar as such suits or
proceedings relate to any property forming part of the Fund or to the
administration of the Fund.
 
(l)           To
borrow money from itself or others for the purposes of the Trust.
 
(m)           To
purchase, hold and sell interests or units of participation in any collective or
common trust fund established by the Trustee, including any such funds which may
be established in the future.
 
(n)           Generally
to do all acts, whether or not expressly authorized which the Trustee deems
necessary or appropriate to perform its duties and discharge its
responsibilities under this Agreement.
 
(o)           To
retain the services of outside legal counsel and/or other professionals as may
be necessary to assist it in connection with the administration of the Trust
and/or management or conservation of the Fund’s assets, including defending the
Trust from attack, claims or litigation regarding its assets.
 
(p)           To
pay expenses of the Trust that are incurred in connection with the
administration of the Trust and/or the management of the Fund’s
assets.
 
Section
6.4.                                 Investment of Fund by
Investment Manager.  
 
(a)           Appointment of Investment
Manager.  The Committee may appoint one or more Investment
Managers, which may be the Trustee or an affiliate of the Trustee, to manage
(including the power to acquire and dispose of) all or any of the assets of the
Fund.  In the event of such appointment, the Committee shall establish
the portion of the assets of the Fund that shall be subject to the management of
any such Investment Manager and shall notify the Trustee in writing of such
appointment and the assets subject to the Investment Manager’s
discretion.  If there shall be more than one Investment Manager, the
portion of the Fund to be invested by each such Investment Manager shall be held
in a separate account and the powers and authority of each such Investment
Manager shall be divided as set forth in the instruments appointing such
Investment Managers.  To the maximum extent permitted by law, the
Trustee shall be protected in assuming that the appointment of an Investment
Manager remains in effect until it is otherwise notified by the Committee in
writing.  With respect to the assets over which an Investment Manager
has investment responsibility, the Investment Manager shall possess all of the
investment powers and responsibilities granted to the Committee hereunder, and
the Trustee shall invest and reinvest such assets pursuant to the direction of
the Investment Manager.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, to the extent
so provided in the document by which the Investment Manager accepts its
appointment, the Committee may:
 
(i)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments shall be
made or liquidated;
 
(ii)           Direct
the Investment Manager that certain investments or types of investments not be
made; and
 
(iii)           Require
that the Investment Manager obtain approval from the Committee prior to
acquiring or disposing of all or any assets under its control.
 
(b)           Successor Investment
Manager.  The Committee may terminate its appointment of an
Investment Manager at any time and shall in writing notify the Trustee of such
termination, and may thereafter appoint a successor Investment Manager in the
same manner as provided in this Section 6.4.  Such successor
Investment Manager shall thereafter, until its appointment shall be terminated,
be deemed to be an Investment Manager for all purposes of this
Agreement.  In the event that a Committee does not exist, the Trustee
shall terminate any Investment Manager that is not an affiliate of the Trustee
and shall immediately appoint its affiliate, Evergreen Investments, as
Investment Manager.
 
(c)           Effect of Appointment of
Investment Manager on Trustee.  So long as an Investment
Manager (other than the Trustee or one of its affiliates) is serving as such,
the Trustee shall be under no duty or obligation to review the assets comprising
any portion of the Fund managed by the Investment Manager, to make any
recommendations with respect to the investment or reinvestment thereof, or to
determine whether any direction received from any Investment Manager is proper
or within the terms of this Agreement or to monitor the activities of any
Investment Manager.  The Trustee shall have no liability or
responsibility to the Corporation, the Committee or any persons claiming any
interest in the Fund for acting without question on the direction of, or for
failing to act in the absence of any direction from, the Committee or any
Investment Manager unless the Trustee participated knowingly in, or knowingly
undertook to conceal, an act or omission of the Committee or of any Investment
Manager constituting a breach of its duties hereunder, knowing such act or
omission was a breach of such duties; provided, however, that the Trustee shall
not be deemed to have “participated” in a breach (i) by the Committee or to have
“knowledge” of any such breach as a result of accepting any property contributed
to the Trust in the Corporation’s discretion or retaining such property as an
investment for the Fund at the Committee’s direction; and (ii) by the Committee
or any Investment Manager for the purposes of this undertaking solely as a
result of the performance by the Trustee or its officers, employees or agents of
any custodial, reporting, recording, and bookkeeping functions with respect to
any assets of the Fund managed by any Investment Manager, or with respect to
which the Trustee has received directions from the Committee, or solely as a
result of settling purchase and sale transactions entered into or directed by
any Investment Manager or the Committee, or to have “knowledge” of any such
breach solely as a result of the information received by the Trustee or its
officers, employees or agents in the normal course in performing such functions,
or settling such transactions.  If the Trustee has actual knowledge of
a breach committed by an Investment Manager, it shall promptly notify the
Committee in writing thereof, and the Trustee, except as required by applicable
law, shall thereafter have no responsibility to remedy such breach.
 
Section
6.5.                                 Making Benefit
Payments.  Upon receipt of direction from the Corporation
consistent with certifications theretofore delivered to the Trustee pursuant to
Section 4.3, the Trustee shall promptly make benefit payments.  All
returns, records and forms required to be filed with the Federal, state and
local taxing authorities or delivered to each Participant and Beneficiary shall
be filed by the Corporation and/or Trustee in accordance with applicable law for
periods commencing with the Effective Date.  Except as provided in
this Agreement, all income taxes required to be paid by each Participant (and
any returns, records and forms required with respect to such taxes) shall be the
sole responsibility of such Participant.  
 
Section
6.6.                                 Deposit of Contributions by
Trustee.  The Trustee shall accept for deposit in the Fund all
contributions in cash made by the Corporation under this Agreement and shall
promptly acknowledge receipt of same.  The Trustee shall have no
responsibility to determine or to question the accuracy or correctness of any
amounts so contributed.
 
Section
6.7.                                 Dealings with the
Trustee.  Persons dealing with the Trustee shall be under no
obligation to see to the proper application of any money paid or property
delivered to the Trustee or to inquire into the Trustee’s authority as to any
transaction.
 
Section
6.8.                                 Use of Fund Assets to Pay
Trust Expenses.  If the amount in the Expense Account is
insufficient to pay the expenses of the Trust, the Trustee may, in its
discretion or at the discretion of the Committee, use assets of the Fund (other
than those deposited in the Expense Account) to pay the expenses of the Trust,
including, without limitation, any (i) legal or other professional expenses
incurred in connection with the management, protection or conservation of the
assets of the Fund and (ii) insurance premiums that may be incurred with respect
to any fiduciary liability insurance that may be obtained by the Trust to cover
potential claims for indemnification that may be made by members of the
Committee pursuant to Section 10.3 of this
Agreement.
 
ARTICLE
VII                                
 
DUTIES
OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
7.1.                                 General Duties of the
Trustee.  
 
(a)           It
shall be the duty of the Trustee to protect and conserve all property received
by it hereunder which, together with the income and gains therefrom and
additions thereto, shall constitute the Fund.  The Trustee shall
manage, invest and reinvest the Fund, collect the income thereof, and make
payments therefrom, all as herein provided.
 
(b)           The
Trustee shall discharge its duties with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence
under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like
capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an
enterprise of a like character and with like aims, and, in accordance with the
documents and instruments governing the Plan and the Trust.
 
Section
7.2.                                 Valuation of
Fund.  The Trustee shall value the Fund as of each Valuation
Date at current fair market value and shall report the results of such valuation
to the Committee.  The Trustee shall value the assets of the Trust at
market and on such other basis or bases (including, without limitation, cost) as
the Committee shall reasonably request.  The market value of the
assets shall be equal to the market value of the securities and other assets in
the Fund, plus cash, interest, dividends and other sums received and accrued but
not yet invested.  The market value of the securities and other assets
in the Fund shall be based on such market quotations and other information as
are available to the Trustee and as may in the Trustee’s discretion be
appropriate.
 
Section
7.3.                                 Reports and
Records.  The Trustee shall:
 
(a)           Keep
accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and
other transactions in the Fund as it shall deem necessary and proper with
respect to its administration of the Trust, and permit inspection of such
accounts, records and assets of the Trust by any duly authorized representative
of the Corporation, the members of the Committee or the Participants during
regular business hours.
 
(b)           Within
sixty (60) days (or such shorter period of time as the Corporation shall
reasonably request) following the close of the accounting year, and at such
other intervals as are mutually agreed to by the Trustee, the Corporation and
the Committee, the Trustee shall file with the Corporation, the Committee and,
unless the Corporation otherwise directs in writing, the Participants a written
account with respect to the transactions effected by the Trustee during such
accounting year or other period.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall file written objections, if any, with respect to the propriety of the
Trustee’s acts and transactions shown in such account within a period of ninety
(90) days from the date of filing such annual or other account.  If
within ninety (90) days after the receipt of the account or any amended account
the Corporation or the Committee has not signed and returned a counterpart to
the Trustee, nor filed with the Trustee notice of any objection to any act or
transaction of the Trustee, the account or amended account shall become an
account settled as between the Trustee and the Corporation and/or the
Committee.  If any objection has been filed, and if the Corporation
and/or the Committee are satisfied that it should be withdrawn or if the account
is adjusted to their satisfaction, the Corporation and/or the Committee shall in
writing filed with the Trustee signify their approval of the account, and the
account shall become an account settled as between the Trustee and the
Corporation and the Committee.
 
When an
account becomes an account settled, such account shall be finally settled, and
the Trustee shall be completely discharged and released, as if such account had
been settled and allowed by a judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction in an action or proceeding in which the Trustee, the Corporation,
the Committee and all persons having or claiming to have any interest in the
Fund or under the Plan were parties.
 
The
Trustee, the Corporation or the Committee shall have the right to apply at any
time to a court of competent jurisdiction for judicial settlement of any account
of the Trustee not previously settled as hereinabove provided.  In any
such action or proceeding it shall be necessary to join as parties only the
Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee (although the Trustee may also join
other parties as it deems appropriate), and any judgment or decree entered
therein shall be conclusive.
 
(c)           Make
such periodic reports to the Corporation and the Committee as may be mutually
agreed to by the Trustee, the Corporation and the Committee, as
applicable.
 
(d)           Prepare
and timely file such tax returns and such other reports and documents, together
with supporting data and schedules, as may be required of the Trustee by law,
with any taxing authority or any other government authority, whether local,
state or Federal.
 
(e)           Provide
the Participants with copies of all such reports, returns, filing and documents
required by law, and cooperate with the Corporation in the filing of tax reports
and returns required to be filed by applicable law.
 
Section
7.4.                                 No Duty to Advance Funds or
to Administer the Plan.  The
Trustee shall have no obligation to advance its own funds for the purpose of
fulfilling its responsibilities under this Agreement, and its obligation to
incur expenses shall at all times be limited to amounts in the Trust available
to be applied toward such expenses.  The Trustee shall not be
responsible in any respect for administering the Plan. 
 
Section
7.5.                                 Resignation/Removal of
Trustee.  The Trustee may resign at any time by delivery of
written notice of resignation to the Committee.  Such resignation
shall take effect as of a future date specified in the notice of resignation,
which date shall not be earlier than the date ninety (90) days after the day on
which the notice is received, or such earlier date as may be agreed to by the
Trustee and the Committee.  In addition, the Trustee may be removed by
the Committee at any time by delivery of written notice of such removal to the
Trustee.  Such removal shall take effect as of a future date specified
in the notice of removal, which date shall not be earlier than the date sixty
(60) days after the day on which the notice is received, or such earlier date as
may be agreed to by the Trustee and the Committee.  
 
Upon the
Committee’s receipt of notice of such resignation or removal, the Committee
shall appoint a successor Trustee by written instrument, to serve commencing on
the effective date of the former Trustee’s resignation or removal.  If
a successor is not appointed by the Committee within sixty (60) days after the
issuance of notice of the Trustee’s resignation or removal, the Trustee may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of his or its
successor.  All expenses of the Trustee in connection with the
proceeding shall be allowed as an administration expense of the
Trust.  The Trustee shall continue to serve until a successor accepts
the Trust and receives delivery of the Fund.  The appointment of a
successor Trustee shall be effective when accepted in writing by the new
Trustee.  Upon the successor Trustee’s acceptance of appointment and
after the final account of the former Trustee has been settled, the former
Trustee shall transfer and deliver the Fund to such successor.  The
former Trustee shall exercise any instrument necessary or reasonably required by
the Committee or the successor Trustee to evidence the
transfer.  Moreover, the former Trustee shall deliver to the successor
Trustee the originals of all reports, records, documents, and other written
information in its possession regarding the Plan, the Fund, and the Participants and
shall deliver copies thereof to the Committee and to a person designated by a
majority of the persons who are Participants (or the Beneficiary of a deceased
Participant) on the date of such resignation or removal, and thereupon shall be
entitled to all unpaid compensation, fees and reimbursements to which it is
entitled under this Agreement and shall be relieved of all responsibilities and
duties under this Agreement.
 
All of
the provisions set forth herein with respect to the Trustee shall relate to each
successor with the same force and effect as if such successor had been
originally named as a Trustee hereunder.  Any successor Trustee shall
have the same powers, rights and duties as its predecessor and shall have the
same title to the Fund as its predecessor.
 
The
successor Trustee need not examine the records and accounts of any prior
Trustee.  The successor Trustee shall not be responsible for, and the
Corporation shall indemnify and defend the successor Trustee from, any claim or
liability resulting from any action or inaction of any prior Trustee or from any
other past event, or any condition existing at the time it becomes successor
Trustee.
 
ARTICLE
VIII                                
 
COMPENSATION,
IMMUNITIES
 
 AND
INDEMNITY OF THE TRUSTEE
 
Section
8.1.                                 Trustee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Trustee shall be entitled to such compensation
and fees for its services under this Agreement as shall be agreed upon from time
to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the Corporation shall
reimburse the Trustee for any expenses incurred by it, including, but not
limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the Trustee, and reasonable
fees for legal services rendered to the Trustee (whether or not rendered in
connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding).  Such
compensation, fees and reimbursement shall be paid to the Trustee pursuant to
the terms set forth at Section 8.2 of this
Agreement.  The Trustee’s entitlement to compensation, fees or
reimbursement hereunder shall not be affected by the resignation or removal of
the Trustee or the termination of the Trust.
 
Section
8.2.                                 Expense
Account.  The Corporation may from time to time make
contributions to the Fund to be held in an Expense Account and to be utilized to
pay the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and
other expenses of the Trust.  To the extent that there are monies in
the Expense Account, the Trustee shall utilize such Expense Account for payment
of the compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee, for
payment of the indemnities referred to in Sections 8.4 and 10.3 hereof, and for other expenses of the Trust,
and, in the absence of sufficient monies, shall seek reimbursement from the
Corporation.  In the event that the Corporation shall fail or refuse
to make such reimbursement within sixty (60) days of demand, the Trustee may
satisfy such obligations out of the other assets of the Fund in such manner as
the Trustee deems to be reasonable in the circumstances, taking into account the
amount of liquid assets, the anticipated needs to make distributions to
Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof), and such other factors as the
Trustee deems relevant.  If the Trustee satisfies any obligations of
the Corporation to pay fees and expenses from other Fund assets, the Corporation
shall immediately upon demand by the Trustee deposit into the Trust an amount of
cash equal to the amount paid from such Fund
assets if, at that time, the Trustee could not replace such assets with a
cash amount equal to the liquidation value of such assets.  If such
funds are not deposited within sixty (60) days of such demand, the Trustee may,
in its sole and absolute discretion, commence legal action against the
Corporation for recovery of the amount paid out of the
Fund.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no amount held
in the Expense Account shall be used for purposes other than paying the
compensation, fees and expenses of the Trustee and the Committee and other
expenses of the Trust, and shall not be distributed to or for the benefit of the
Participants (or the Beneficiaries thereof).
 
Section
8.3.                                 Immunities.  The
Trustee shall have the following privileges and immunities:
 
(a)           The
Corporation and the Committee shall furnish the Trustee with instruments
evidencing individuals designated by the Corporation or the Committee, as the
case may be, who are empowered to give directions, statements or certificates to
the Trustee.  A written direction, statement or certificate to the
Trustee signed by any such individual shall be deemed to be the direction,
statement or certificate of the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may
be, and the Trustee may rely upon such directions, statements or certificates to
the extent not prohibited by law.  The Corporation and the Committee
shall furnish the Trustee from time to time with instruments evidencing the
termination of such designated individuals or the appointment of new such
designated individuals and the Trustee shall be entitled to rely upon such
instruments as evidence of the identity and authority of such designated
individuals and shall not be charged with notice of any change with respect
thereto until the Corporation or the Committee, as the case may be, has
furnished the Trustee with instruments relative to such change.
 
(b)           The
Trustee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Trustee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Trustee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties it may
see fit.  In the event that the Trustee does delegate such ministerial
duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person to whom these
duties have been delegated.  The Trustee shall be reimbursed by the
Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal counsel, agents and
expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section 8.2 hereof.  
 
Section
8.4.                                 Indemnity of the
Trustee.
 
(a)           The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds the Trustee harmless from and against
any and all losses, damages, costs, expenses or liabilities, including
reasonable fees for legal services and other costs of litigation, to which the
Trustee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by, incurred
in connection with, or in any way associated with this Agreement, including any
reasonable discretionary action which the Trustee may take under the Trust,
except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct of the Trustee.  If one or more liabilities shall arise, or
if the Corporation fails to indemnify the Trustee as provided herein, or both,
then the Trustee may engage counsel of the Trustee’s choice, but at the
Corporation’s expense, either to conduct the defense against such liabilities,
or to conduct such actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided
for herein, or to take both such actions.  The Trustee shall notify
the Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Trustee has engaged counsel
of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b)           If
the Trustee shall be entitled to indemnification by the Corporation pursuant to
this Section 8.4, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification
upon demand, the Trustee may apply the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction
of the obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by
the Trustee against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in behalf
of the Trust.
 
Section
8.5.                                 Determination of Interests
in the Fund; Enforcement of Trust and Legal Proceedings.  The
interest of the Participants (and the Beneficiaries thereof) in the Fund shall
be determined in accordance with the terms of the Plan.  The Trustee shall have no duty to question
any direction given by the Corporation or the Committee to the Trustee,
including any direction advising the Trustee as to such interests under the Plan.  The Corporation and the
Committee shall have authority to enforce this Agreement.  To protect
the Fund from the expenses which might otherwise be incurred, no person other
than the Corporation or the Committee may institute or maintain any action or
proceeding against the Trustee or the Fund, or join in any such action or
proceeding, in the absence of written authorization by the Corporation or the
Committee.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section 8.5, in any
action or proceeding affecting the Fund, the only necessary parties shall be the
Corporation, the Committee and the Trustee, and no other person shall be
entitled to any notice or process.
 
ARTICLE
IX                                
 
AMENDMENT
AND TERMINATION OF THE TRUST
 
Section
9.1.                                 Amendment of
Agreement.  By a duly executed, written instrument delivered to
the Trustee and acknowledged in the same form as this Agreement, the Corporation
shall have the right at any time and from time to time to amend this Agreement
in whole or in part, except that: (i) the
duties and responsibilities of the Trustee or the Committee shall not be
increased, and the protections afforded to the Trustee or the Committee shall
not be impaired without the written consent of the Trustee or the Committee, as
the case may be; (ii) the protection afforded with respect to obligations
payable to or on behalf of the Participants hereunder may not be impaired
without the unanimous written consent of the Participants; and (iii) the
Corporation shall not have the power to revoke this Trust or to revest title in
itself to the assets comprising the Fund.  Any such amendment shall be
effective upon (a) delivery of such amendment to the Trustee and the Committee,
together with a certified copy of the resolution of the Board of Directors of
the Corporation or of its Compensation Committee,
as the case may be; and (b) endorsement by each the Trustee and the
Committee on such instrument upon receipt thereof, together with any required
consent or consents thereto.  No such amendment shall adversely affect
any benefits accrued under the Plan
with respect to the Participants.  All instruments amending this
Agreement shall be noted upon or kept attached to the executed original of this
Agreement.  
 
Section
9.2.                                 Termination of
Agreement.  This Agreement may not be terminated until the
liability of the Corporation for the payment of all benefits to all
Participants, and the Beneficiaries thereof, has been satisfied in full or until
such time as no funds remain on deposit in the Fund pursuant to this Agreement;
provided, however, that with the written consent of a Participant, or the
Beneficiary thereof, the Committee may terminate this Agreement at any time with
respect to such consenting Participant or
Beneficiary.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this
Trust shall terminate no later than twenty-one (21) years after the death of the
last survivor of all of the Participants included in the original list of
Participants of this Agreement as constituted prior to this Restated and Amended
Agreement, and those persons now living who have been designated as
Beneficiaries of such Participants in accordance with the terms of the Plan. 
 
ARTICLE
X                                
 
THE
COMMITTEE
 
Section
10.1.                                 Membership and Actions of
the Committee.  
 
(a)           The
Committee shall at all times consist of a minimum of three (3) individuals, all
of whom shall be Participants of the
Plan.  Any member of the Committee may resign upon thirty (30)
days prior written notice to the Corporation.  Moreover, any member of
the Committee may be removed at any time by the Corporation.
 
(b)           In
the event of a vacancy on the Committee, the other member(s) of the Committee
shall appoint a successor.  In the event that there is at any time no
member of the Committee then in office, successor members shall be appointed by
the Corporation.
 
(c)           Any
action by the Committee shall require the written approval of at least a
majority of the members of the Committee.  A Committee member shall
not be liable hereunder for any act taken, or omitted to be taken, in good
faith, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful
misconduct by such Committee member.
 
(d)           All
of the provisions set forth herein with respect to a member of the Committee
shall relate to each successor with the same force and effect as if such
successor had been originally named as a member of the Committee.
 
(e)           The
Committee is authorized to seek the advice of, and consult with, legal counsel
with respect to any matter involving the Trust.  Such counsel may, but
need not, be legal counsel to the Corporation.  The Committee shall be
entitled to rely on the advice of legal counsel with respect to any matter
involving the Trust.  The Committee may also from time to time employ
agents and expert assistants and delegate to them such ministerial duties as it
may see fit.  In the event that the Committee does delegate such
ministerial duties, it shall periodically review the performance of the person
to whom these duties have been delegated.  The Committee members shall
be reimbursed by the Corporation for all costs arising from the employ of legal
counsel, agents and expert assistants pursuant to the terms set forth at Section
8.2 of this Agreement.
 
Section
10.2.                                 Committee Compensation and
Expenses.  The Committee members shall be entitled to such
compensation and fees for their services under this Agreement as shall be agreed
upon from time to time with the Corporation.  Likewise, the
Corporation shall reimburse the Committee members for any expenses incurred by
them, including, but not limited to, all proper charges and disbursements of the
Committee members, and reasonable fees for legal services rendered to the
Committee (whether or not rendered in connection with a judicial or
administrative proceeding).  Such compensation, fees and reimbursement
shall be paid to the Committee members pursuant to the terms set forth at
Section 8.2 hereof.  The
Committee members’ entitlement to compensation, fees or reimbursement hereunder
shall not be affected by the resignation or removal of any member or members of
the Committee or the termination of the Trust.
 
Section
10.3.                                 Indemnity of
Committee.  
 
(a)           The
Corporation hereby indemnifies and holds each member of the Committee harmless
from and against any and all liabilities, including reasonable fees for legal
services and other costs of litigation, to which each such member of the
Committee may become subject pursuant to, arising out of, occasioned by,
incurred in connection with, or in any way associated with this Trust or
Agreement, except for any act or omission constituting gross negligence or
willful misconduct of such member of the Committee.  If one or more
liabilities shall arise, or if the Corporation fails to indemnify such member of
the Committee as provided herein, or both, then the Committee member may engage
counsel of the Committee member’s choice, but at the Corporation’s expense,
either to conduct the defense against such liabilities, or to conduct such
actions as may be necessary to obtain the indemnity provided for herein, or to
take both such actions.  The Committee member shall notify the
Corporation within fifteen (15) days after the Committee member has so engaged
counsel of the name and address of such counsel.
 
(b)           If
a Committee member shall be entitled to indemnification pursuant to this Section
10.3, and the Corporation shall not provide such indemnification upon demand,
the Trustee shall satisfy any indemnity to a Committee member pursuant to this
Section 10.3 out of the assets of the Fund in full satisfaction of the
obligations for indemnity by the Corporation, and any legal proceeding by the
Committee member against the Corporation for such indemnification shall be in
behalf of the Trust.
 
ARTICLE
XI                                
 
MISCELLANEOUS
 
Section
11.1.                                 Governing
Law.  This Trust is created and accepted in the State of
Delaware.  All questions pertaining to the validity or construction of
this Agreement and the acts and transactions of the parties hereto and their
respective successors shall be determined in accordance with the laws of the
State of Texas, except as to matters governed by Federal law.
 
Section
11.2.                                 No Effect on
Employment.  Nothing contained in this Agreement shall create,
or be construed or interpreted to create, any new or additional obligations on
the part of the Corporation or its affiliates
to retain any person in its employ or interfere in any way with the right
of the Corporation or its affiliates to
discharge any employee.
 
Section
11.3.                                 Successors.  This
Agreement shall be binding upon, and the powers herein granted to the
Corporation and the Trustee, respectively, shall be exercisable by, the
respective successors and assigns of the Corporation and the
Trustee.
 
Section
11.4.                                 Severability.  Should
any provision of this Agreement be determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unlawful or unenforceable, such determination shall not
adversely affect the remaining provisions of this Agreement, unless it shall
make impossible the maintenance or operation of the Trust for its intended
purposes.  To the extent any provision of this Agreement is determined
to be unlawful or unenforceable, this Agreement shall be construed to be carried
out to the fullest extent possible in a lawful and enforceable
manner.
 
Section
11.5.                                 Incorporation of Plan as
Part of Agreement.  The Plan is expressly incorporated herein
and made a part hereof with the same force and effect as if fully set
forth.  The Corporation shall deliver to the Trustee a copy of all
amendments to the Plan hereafter adopted.
 
Section
11.6.                                 Execution in
Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of
counterparts, each of which shall be considered an original and said
counterparts shall constitute but one and the same instrument.
 
Section
11.7.                                 Effect of Divisions and
Captions.  The division of this Agreement into articles,
paragraphs, sections and subsections and the use of captions are solely for
convenience and shall have no legal effect in construing the provisions of this
Agreement.
 
Section
11.8.                                 Gender and
Number.  Whenever the masculine, feminine, or neuter gender is
used inappropriately in this Agreement, this Agreement shall be read as if the
appropriate gender was used, and, unless the context otherwise requires, the
singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
 
Section
11.9.                                 Mistake of
Fact.  A misstatement or other mistake of fact relating to this
Agreement shall be corrected when it becomes known, and the Committee shall make
such adjustment on account thereof as it considers equitable and practicable;
provided that no adjustment under this Section 11.9 shall be made which violates
any provision of section 409A of the Code or any guidance issued
thereunder.  
 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the Corporation, the Trustee and the Committee have entered in
to this Agreement as of NOVEMBER 17, 2008, effective as of the Effective
Date.
 
CORPORATION:
 
AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.,
   a
Delaware corporation
 

Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;   By:
                                                                        Kenneth
W. Wimberly, Corporate Secretary


TRUSTEE:
 
WACHOVIA BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION


Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;   By:

                                                                Name:                                                                        

                                                                Title:                                                                        



COMMITTEE:
 

 

Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By:
Gerard J. Arpey



Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By: 
Thomas W. Horton



Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By:
Jeffrey J. Brundage



Attest:  ____________________________                                                                                                                                    
0;     By:
Gary F. Kennedy




EX-10.135
21
ex10135.htm
PROCEDURES FOR DEFERRAL OF BOARD RETAINERS AND FEES, AMENDED

ex10135.htm







AMR
CORPORATION
 

 
PROCEDURES
FOR DEFERRAL OF BOARD RETAINERS AND FEES
 
(AN
AMENDMENT AND RESTATEMENT
 
OF
THE
 
DIRECTORS’
STOCK EQUIVALENT PLAN)
 
ARTICLE
I
 
PURPOSE OF THESE
PROCEDURES
 
Section
1.1 Purpose of these
Procedures.  This document is effective January 1, 2005, except
as otherwise expressly provided.  It is an amendment and restatement
in the entirety of the Directors’ Stock Equivalent Purchase Plan (the “Plan”)
for deferral of retainer and fees by active and former members of the Board of
Directors of AMR Corporation.  The Plan is amended and restated by
these procedures to comply with section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended (defined in Section 2.1 as the “Code”).  These
procedures control the terms and provisions of all elective deferred
compensation agreements deferring retainers and fees remaining outstanding with
such Board members on and after January 1, 2005, and shall govern the terms and
conditions of such elective deferrals.  These procedures shall prevail
over the terms of any separate agreement made pursuant to this Plan which is in
conflict with this Plan, and replace the document entitled “Director’s Stock
Equivalent Purchase Plan”, for deferrals subject to these
procedures.  
 
ARTICLE
II
 
DEFINITIONS
 
Section
2.1 Definitions.  Throughout
this document, certain defined terms are used which are identified by initial
capitalization.  Such terms are defined in this Section 2.1, unless
the context in which such terms are used clearly provides
otherwise.  
 
(a) “AMR”.  AMR
Corporation and any successor corporation thereto.
 
(b) “Beneficiary”.  A
person designated by a Participant who, as permitted under the terms of these
procedures, is or may be entitled to a benefit under these procedures in the
event of the death of the Participant.  If no Beneficiary is
designated, or if the designated Beneficiary is not then living, benefits will
be paid pursuant to Section 9.2.
 
(c) “Board”.  The
Board of Directors of AMR Corporation.
 
(d) “Change in
Control”.  A change in ownership of AMR, or change in effective
control of AMR, or change in ownership of a substantial portion of AMR's assets,
in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor
guidance thereto.  For such purpose the specified percentages in
Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii) or successor guidance
thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective percentage.
 
(e) “Code”.  The
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
(f) “Committee”.  The
Nominating/Corporate Governance Committee of the Board, unless the Board, by
majority vote of its members, elects to serve as the Committee
hereunder.  In the event the Board determines to assume the
administrative duties under these procedures, references hereunder to the
“Committee” shall be references to the Board.
 
(g) “Deferred Compensation
Agreement”.  A written agreement between AMR or American
Airlines, Inc. and a Participant pursuant to which a Participant consents to
participation and makes a deferral of compensation hereunder.
 
(h) “Disabled” or
“Disability”.  “Disabled” or “Disability” shall be determined
pursuant to section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Code.  Determination of
Disability shall be made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor guidance thereto.
 
(i) “Participant”.  A
member or former member of the Board who has electively deferred retainers and
fees under these procedures shall be a Participant and shall remain a
Participant until he or she or his or her Beneficiary has received payment of
all amounts deferred hereunder.  A Participant who is an employee of
AMR or American Airlines, Inc., is not eligible to participate while in employee
status.
 
ARTICLE
III
 
ADMINISTRATION
 
Section
3.1 Administration.  This
Plan shall be administered by the Committee.  The Committee shall have
the power and the duty to take all actions necessary and proper to carry out the
provisions of these procedures.  
 
ARTICLE
IV
 
ELIGIBILITY AND
PARTICIPATION
 
Section
4.1 Eligibility and
Participation.  These procedures as provided in this Plan shall
cover members of the Board who are not employees of AMR or American Airlines,
Inc.  Such individuals shall be entitled to defer retainers and fees
while serving as members of the Board.  In the event such a member
ceases to be a member of the Board of AMR, he or she shall cease to be eligible
to elect any future deferrals hereunder, but participation shall continue until
all deferrals are paid. Any eligible Board member who has made a deferral is a
Participant.  
 
ARTICLE
V
 
DEFERRAL
 
Section
5.1 Deferral.  A
Participant may elect prior to the commencement of each calendar year to defer
payment of all or any part of his or her director fees and retainers for
services to be rendered during the following calendar year according to the
Participant's Deferred Compensation Agreement.  In the year in which
an eligible director is elected or appointed, the eligible director may defer
retainers and fees for such year by signing a Deferred Compensation Agreement,
within thirty (30) days of election or appointment which shall become effective
for fees and retainers payable after the date of execution.  Once
executed, a Deferred Compensation Agreement may not be cancelled or
revoked.  The Participant shall elect the form in which his or her
benefits shall be paid at the time he or she makes his or her deferral election
pursuant to these procedures.  Once made, an election of the time and
form of payment cannot be changed unless (i) made twelve (12) months before the
time of the first payment to be changed, (ii) is not effective for twelve (12)
months, and (iii) must defer the payment at least five (5) years later than the
originally scheduled first payment date, except as otherwise specifically
permitted in applicable Treasury Regulations.  Each Deferred
Compensation Agreement shall constitute a separate payment election for the
compensation deferred under that Deferred Compensation
Agreement.  
 
ARTICLE
VI
 
ACCOUNTING FOR DEFERRED
AMOUNTS
 
Section
6.1 Accounting for Deferred
Amounts.  AMR shall maintain an individual account under the
name of each Participant on whose behalf compensation has been deferred under
these procedures.  Each such account shall be adjusted to reflect the
retainers and fees credited thereto, the additional amounts credited on such
compensation pursuant to Article VII and any payment of such amounts
hereunder.  Each account shall be credited with earnings or values
computed pursuant to Article VII.  
 
Section
6.2 Funding.  AMR
will pay the entire cost of the Plan.  It is the intent of AMR to pay
benefits as they become payable from the general assets of AMR.
 
ARTICLE
VII
 
COMPUTATION OF AMOUNTS
CREDITED TO DEFERRED ACCOUNTS
 
Section
7.1 Deferral of Retainers and
Fees.  A Participant may elect to defer all or a portion of his
or her yearly retainers and fees pursuant to one of two deferral
methods:
 
(a) JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A.
Deferral.  Under this method, amounts deferred will earn
interest (compounded monthly) at the prime rate in effect from time to time at
the JP Morgan Chase Bank N.A., or any successor thereto.
 
(b) Stock Purchase Equivalent
Plan.  Under this method, compensation deferred during any
calendar month is converted on the last business day of each month into stock
equivalent units by dividing the total amount of deferred compensation by the
arithmetic mean of the highest and lowest quoted selling price, regular way, of
the common stock of AMR on the New York Stock Exchange (“Fair Market Value”)
during such month.  At the end of the determined period AMR or
American Airlines, Inc., will pay to the Participant an amount in cash equal to
the number of accumulated stock equivalent units multiplied by the Fair Market
Value of the AMR common stock during the month in which the deferral period
terminates.  The number of stock equivalent units computed as above
will be allocated to the Participant’s account on a cumulative
basis.
 
In the
event of any merger, reorganization, consolidation, recapitalization, stock
dividend, stock split or other change in corporate structure affecting AMR’s
common stock, an adjustment will be made to the number of stock equivalent units
credited to a Participant's account.  The adjustment contemplated by
this paragraph will be similar to adjustments made to stock awards made to
officers of AMR.
 
ARTICLE
VIII
 
VESTING
 
Section
8.1 Vesting.  A
Participant shall at all times have a nonforfeitable right to all amounts
credited to his or her account hereunder.
 
ARTICLE
IX
 
TIME AND METHOD OF
DISTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS
 
Section
9.1 Time and Method of
Distribution of Benefits.  Amounts shall be paid in a single
lump sum after the first to occur of the following events (not later than sixty
days after):
 
(a) the date
of the Participant's Disability;
 
(b) the date
of the Participant's death;
 
(c) the date
of a Change in Control; or
 
(d) the time
of payment elected by the Participant in his or  her Deferred
Compensation Agreement.
 
No
Participant or Beneficiary shall have any right to payment of any amounts
hereunder prior to such event except as provided in this Article IX, and amounts
shall be payable hereunder only in accordance with the terms and provisions of
these procedures.  Payment may not be accelerated by action of AMR or
the Participant, except as provided in Section 10.1.  The Participant
shall elect the time at which his or her deferral for the relevant year shall be
paid when he or she makes his or her deferral election pursuant to Article V of
the Plan.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section
9.1, prior to December 31, 2008, changes to the time and form of payment
accomplished by this amended and restated Plan, and any amendments to individual
Deferred Compensation Agreements which change the time and form of payment shall
be deemed to have made in accordance with Internal Revenue Service Notices
2006-79 and 2007-86.
 
Section
9.2 Death of a
Participant.  In the event that a Participant shall die at any
time prior to complete distribution of all amounts payable to him or her,
payment shall be made within sixty (60) days of the date of the Participant’s
death, in a lump sum to the Beneficiary designated by the
Participant.  In the absence of a designation by a Participant or if
the designated Beneficiary(ies) predecease the Participant, the unpaid amount
shall be paid to the Participant's spouse, and if the spouse is not then living
to the Participant’s estate.  Each Participant shall have the right to
designate the Beneficiary selected in writing.  Beneficiary
designations shall be made only through the Participant's Deferred Compensation
Agreement.
 
Section
9.3 Time of Payment Elected by
Participant.  Payment pursuant to a Deferred Compensation
Agreement for periods of Board service before January 1, 2005, shall be
made in accordance with the payment terms designated by the relevant Deferred
Compensation Agreement, notwithstanding the provisions of this Article
IX.
 
Section
9.4 Payment In The Event Of
Legal Disability.  If a person entitled to any payment shall be
under a legal disability, or in the sole judgment of the Committee shall
otherwise be unable to apply such payment to his or her own interest and
advantage, the Committee, in the exercise of his discretion, may direct such
payment in any one (1) or more of the following ways:
 
(a) Directly
to such person;
 
(b) To his or
her legal guardian or conservator; or
 
(c) To his or
her spouse or to any person charged with his or her support;
 
to be
expended for his or her benefit.  The decision of the Committee shall
in each case be final and binding upon all persons in interest.  Any
such payment shall completely discharge the obligations of the AMR and American
Airlines, Inc. with regard to such payment.
 
Section
9.5 Assignment.  The
right to receive benefits under the Plan may not be anticipated, alienated,
sold, transferred, assigned, pledged, reimbursed or subjected to any change or
legal process.  
 
ARTICLE
X
 
AMENDMENT AND
TERMINATION
 
Section
10.1 Amendment;
Termination.  The Board may terminate or amend this Plan,
provided that no such termination or suspension shall adversely affect a benefit
payable under this Plan with respect to a Participant.  In the event
of termination of this Plan the Committee shall distribute to the Participant in
a lump sum all amounts credited to the Participant’s account.  Such
payment will be made sixty (60) days after the date of
termination.  Any termination of this Plan which permits acceleration
of payment shall be made only in accordance with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix) or successor guidance hereto.
 
Section
10.2 Construction.  All
questions pertaining to the construction, validity and effect of this Plan shall
be determined in accordance with the laws of the United States and the State of
Texas.
 

 


 



 






 



IN
WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused this instrument to be executed the
17th
day of November, 2008, effective as of January 1, 2005.
 

AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           Corporate
Secretary
















EX-10.138
22
ex10138.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138.htm









PURCHASE
AGREEMENT NUMBER 3219

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Relating
to Boeing Model 787-923 Aircraft





BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



TABLE OF
CONTENTS


                                                                                                               SA
ARTICLES                                                                                                                     NUMBER


1.              Quantity,
Model and Description

2.              Delivery
Schedule

3.              Price

4.              Payment

5.              Miscellaneous

6.              Confidential
Treatment

TABLE

1.              Aircraft
Information Table – TRENT
1.              Aircraft
Information Table - GENX

EXHIBIT

A.              Aircraft
Configuration

B.              Aircraft
Delivery Requirements and Responsibilities

C.              Defined
Terms

SUPPLEMENTAL
EXHIBITS





AE1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





BFE1.                      Buyer
Furnished Equipment Variables

CS1.                      787
Customer Support Document





EE1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









EE1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









SLP1.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







P.A. No.
3219                                                               
i
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



LETTER
AGREEMENTS





3219-01


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




3219-02                                           Special
Terms – Seats and In-Flight Entertainment




3219-04


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




3219-05                                           Spare
Parts Commitments
3219-06                                           Spare
Parts Initial Provisioning
3219-08                                           Open
Configuration Matters

6-1162-AKP-071R1                                           Purchase
Obligations




6-1162-AKP-072R2


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-AKP-073R1                                           Accident Claims and Litigation




6-1162-CLO-1031


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1032


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1039


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-CLO-1043                                           787
Inspection Process




6-1162-CLO-1042


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1045


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1046


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-CLO-1047


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-CLO-1048                                           Final
Matters
6-1162-CLO-1049                                           CSI
Matters
6-1162-TRW-0664                                           Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights




6-1162-TRW-0665


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0666


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0667


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0668


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-TRW-0670                                           Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft




6-1162-TRW-0671


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








6-1162-TRW-0672


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




6-1162-TRW-0673                                           Confidentiality
6-1162-TRW-0674                                           Business
Considerations





P.A. No.
3219                                                              
ii
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Purchase
Agreement No. 3219

between

The
Boeing Company

and

American
Airlines, Inc.

______________________________

                      This
Purchase Agreement No. 3219 dated as of __________between The Boeing Company
(Boeing) and American
Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to the
purchase and sale of Model 787-923 aircraft together with all tables, exhibits,
supplemental exhibits, letter agreements and other attachments thereto, if any,
(Purchase Agreement)
incorporates and, solely for purposes of the sale
by Boeing and purchase by Customer of Model 787 aircraft, amends the
terms and conditions of the Aircraft General Terms Agreement dated as of October 31, 1997 between the parties, identified
as AGTA-AAL (AGTA).

Article
1.                      Quantity, Model, and
Description.

The
aircraft to be delivered to Customer will be designated as Model 787-923
aircraft (the Aircraft).  Boeing
will manufacture and sell to Customer Aircraft conforming to the configuration
described in Exhibit A in the quantities listed in Table 1 to this Purchase Agreement.

Article
2.                      Delivery
Schedule.

The
Scheduled Delivery Months of the Aircraft are as listed in the attached Table 1.
Exhibit B describes certain requirements and
responsibilities for both Customer and Boeing in order to accomplish the
delivery of the Aircraft.

Article
3.                      Price.

3.1           Aircraft
Basic
Price.  The Aircraft
Basic Price [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]for each Aircraft is
listed in Table 1.





P.A. No.
3219

 



 






 



3.2           The
Advance Payment Base Price. The Advance Payment Base Price for each Aircraft is
listed in Table 1.

3.3           Aircraft and Advance
Payment Price Components.[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

Article
4.                      Payment.

                      4.1           Deposit.                      Boeing
acknowledges receipt of a deposit in the amount shown in Table 1 for each
Aircraft (Deposit).

4.2           Advance
Payments.                                           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

4.3           Advance Payments
Due.                                                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

4.4           Payment of
Balance.                                                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

Article
5.                      Miscellaneous.

5.1           Aircraft Information
Table.  Table 1 contains and consolidates information contained
in Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 with respect to (i) quantity of Aircraft, (ii)
applicable Detail Specification, (iii) Scheduled Delivery Months, (iv) Aircraft
Basic Price, (v) applicable escalation factors, (vi) Advance Payment Base
Prices, and (vii) Advance Payments and their schedules.

5.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.3           BFE
Variables.  Supplemental Exhibit BFE1 to this Purchase
Agreement contains vendor selection dates, on-dock dates and other variables
applicable to the Aircraft pursuant to the BFE Provisions Document. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.4           Customer Support
Variables.  Information, training, support, materials,
data, protections, goods and
services furnished by Boeing in support of introduction of the Aircraft
into Customer's fleet are described in Supplemental Exhibit CS1 (hereinafter
referred to as “Entitlements”). Solely for purposes of the Aircraft, Supplemental Exhibit CS1 supersedes in its
entirety Exhibit B to the AGTA, and, for clarity, all references to Exhibit B to
the AGTA shall be deemed to refer to Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the Purchase
Agreement.
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.5           Engine
Escalation Variables.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

5.6           Service Life Policy
Component Variables.  Supplemental Exhibit SLP1 to this
Purchase Agreement lists the airframe and landing gear components covered by the
Service Life Policy for the Aircraft (Covered
Components).

5.7           Public
Announcement.  Boeing may
make a public announcement regarding Customer's purchase of the Aircraft only upon prior
written approval of Boeing's press release by Customer. Customer may make such an announcement at its sole
discretion.

5.8           Negotiated Agreement; Entire
Agreement.  This Purchase Agreement including, without
limitation, the provisions of Article 8 of the AGTA relating to indemnification
and insurance, and Article 11 of Part 2 of Exhibit C of the AGTA relating to
DISCLAIMER AND
RELEASE and EXCLUSION OF CONSEQUENTIAL
AND OTHER DAMAGES, has been the subject of discussion and negotiation and
is understood by the parties. The Aircraft Price and other agreements of the
parties stated in this Purchase Agreement were arrived at in consideration of
such provisions. This Purchase Agreement, including the AGTA, contains the
entire agreement between the parties and supersedes all previous proposals,
understandings, commitments or representations whatsoever, oral or written, and
may be changed only in writing signed by authorized representatives of the
parties.

5.9           Defined
Terms. Exhibit C to this Purchase Agreement contains certain defined terms used
in the AGTA or elsewhere in this Purchase Agreement. All capitalized terms used
in this Purchase Agreement but not otherwise defined shall have the meaning set
forth in Exhibit C to this Purchase Agreement or elsewhere in this Purchase
Agreement.

Article
6.                      Confidential
Treatment.                                                      

 
Customer
and Boeing understand and agree that the information
contained herein represents confidential business information and has value
precisely because it is not available generally or to other parties. Customer
and Boeing agree to limit the disclosure of its contents to employees of
Customer and Boeing with a need to know the contents for purposes of helping
Customer and Boeing perform their obligations under the Purchase Agreement and
who understand they are not to disclose its contents to any other person or
entity without the prior written consent of the other party hereto.
 


DATED AS
OF _______________________





AMERICAN
      AIRLINES, INC.
 
 
BY           _______________________
 
ITS           _______________________
 


THE
      BOEING COMPANY
 
 
BY           _______________________
 
ITS           _______________________
 











EX-10.138A
23
ex10138a.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138a.htm




AIRCRAFT
CONFIGURATION

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Exhibit A
to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A. No.
3219                                                                  
A
PA_Exhibit_A   Rev.: 2/22/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


Exhibit A
to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Page
2



AIRCRAFT
CONFIGURATION

Dated
                

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787 AIRCRAFT


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]
 




P.A. No.
3219                                                                  
A
PA_Exhibit_A   Rev.: 2/22/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 





 






EX-10.138B
24
ex10138b.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138b.htm






 



 






 


Exhibit B
to
Purchase
Agreement No. @
Page
1



AIRCRAFT
DELIVERY REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Exhibit B
to Purchase Agreement Number 3219





P.A. No.
3219                                                                  
B
PA_Exhibit_B   Rev.: 05-17-04 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


Exhibit B
to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Page
4




 
AIRCRAFT
DELIVERY REQUIREMENTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787-923 AIRCRAFT


Both
Boeing and Customer have certain documentation and approval responsibilities at
various times during the construction cycle of Customer’s Aircraft that are
critical to making the delivery of each Aircraft a positive experience for both
parties.  This Exhibit B documents those responsibilities and
indicates recommended completion deadlines for the actions to be
accomplished.

1.           GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTATION
REQUIREMENTS.

Certain
actions are required to be taken by Customer in advance of the Scheduled
Delivery Month of each Aircraft with respect to obtaining certain government
issued documentation.

1.1           Airworthiness and
Registration Documents.

Not later than [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
prior to delivery of each Aircraft, Customer will notify Boeing of the
registration number to be painted on the side of the Aircraft.  In
addition, and not later than [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
prior to delivery of each Aircraft, Customer will, by letter to the
regulatory authority having jurisdiction, authorize the temporary use of such
registration numbers by Boeing during the pre-delivery testing of the
Aircraft.

Customer
is responsible for furnishing any temporary or permanent registration
certificates required by any Governmental Authority having jurisdiction to be
displayed aboard the Aircraft after delivery.

1.2           Certificate of Sanitary
Construction.

U.S. Registered
Aircraft.  Boeing will obtain from the United States Public
Health Service, a United States Certificate of Sanitary Construction to be
displayed aboard each Aircraft after delivery to Customer.



2.           INSURANCE
CERTIFICATES.

Insurance certificate requirements are
defined in Article 8 of the AGTA.



P.A. No.
3219                                                               
B-
PA_Exhibit_B   Rev.: 05-17-04 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


Exhibit B
to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Page
4



3.           NOTICE OF FLYAWAY
CONFIGURATION.

3.1           Flyaway Configuration
Notice.

Not later
than [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT] prior to delivery of the Aircraft, Customer will
provide to Boeing a configuration letter stating the requested flyaway
configuration of the Aircraft for its ferry flight.  This
configuration letter should include:





 
      


(i)


the
      name of the company which is to furnish fuel for the ferry flight and any
      scheduled post-delivery flight training, the method of payment for such
      fuel, and fuel load for the ferry
flight;









 
      


(ii)


the
      cargo to be loaded and where it is to be stowed on board the Aircraft, the
      address where cargo is to be shipped after flyaway and notification of any
      hazardous materials requiring special
handling;









 
      


(iii)


any
      BFE equipment to be removed prior to flyaway and returned to Boeing BFE
      stores for installation on Customer's subsequent
  Aircraft.





The
information contained in such configuration letter may be changed from time to
time by the mutual consent of Boeing and Customer.

3.2                  Ferry Flight
Information.

Customer
will provide to Boeing at least [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
prior to delivery of each Aircraft:

(i)       a
complete list of names and citizenship of each crew member and non-revenue
passenger who will be aboard the ferry flight; and

(ii)                  a
complete ferry flight itinerary.

4.           DELIVERY ACTIONS BY
BOEING.

4.1           Schedule of
Inspections.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.2           Schedule of Demonstration
Flights.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.3           Schedule for Customer's
Flight Crew.  Boeing will inform Customer of the date that a
flight crew is required for acceptance routines associated with delivery of the
Aircraft.

4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.5           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.6           Delivery Papers, Documents
and Data.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

4.7           Delegation of
Authority.  Boeing will present a certified copy of a
Resolution of Boeing's Board of Directors, designating and authorizing certain
persons to act on its behalf in connection with delivery of the Aircraft
including the person executing the transfer of title documents.

4.8           Standard Airworthiness
Certificate.  Boeing will provide at delivery of each Aircraft
the Standard Airworthiness Certificate [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

5.           DELIVERY ACTIONS BY
CUSTOMER.

5.1           Aircraft Radio Station
License.  At delivery Customer will provide a copy of its
Aircraft Radio Station License (or a written statement of the location of the
original license) to be placed on board the Aircraft following
delivery.

5.2           Aircraft Flight
Log.                                           At
delivery Customer will provide the Aircraft Flight Log for the
Aircraft.

5.3           Delegation of
Authority.  Customer will present to Boeing at delivery of the
Aircraft an original or certified copy of Customer's Delegation of Authority
designating and authorizing certain persons to act on its behalf in connection
with delivery of the specified Aircraft.




P.A. No.
3219                                                               
B-
PA_Exhibit_B   Rev.: 05-17-04 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 






EX-10.138C
25
ex10138c.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138c.htm






 



 






 


 
Rev. dated 5-5-97




PURCHASE
AGREEMENT DEFINITIONS

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Exhibit C
to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A.
No. 3219                                                              
C
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



PURCHASE
AGREEMENT DEFINITIONS

Dated
 __________ ,
2008

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787-923 AIRCRAFT



I.           Definitions.

The
following terms, when used in capitalized form in this Purchase Agreement,
including the AGTA and any exhibits, schedules, attachments, supplements,
amendments and letter agreements to this Purchase Agreement, have the following
meanings:

“Advance Payments”
means the payments made by Customer in advance of delivery with respect of an
Aircraft pursuant to Section 4.2 of the Purchase Agreement.

“Advance Payment Base
Price” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.6 of the
AGTA.

“Affiliate”, with
respect to a specified Person, means any other Person directly or indirectly
controlling or controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with
such Person. For the purposes of this definition, “control” when used
with respect to any specified Person, means the power to direct the management
and policies of such Person, directly or indirectly, whether through the
ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise, and the terms “controlling” and
“controlled”
have meanings correlative to the foregoing.

“AGTA” has the meaning
set forth in the recital of the Aircraft General Terms
Agreement  dated October 31, 1997 between Boeing and
Customer.

“Aircraft” means any
or all, as the context requires, of  the Boeing Model 787-923 aircraft
described in Table 1 to the Purchase Agreement, together with the Engines and
Parts that are incorporated or installed in or attached to such
aircraft.

“Aircraft Basic Price”
has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.4 of the AGTA.

“Aircraft Software”
has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Aircraft Price” has
the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.7 of the AGTA.

“Airframe Escalation
Adjustment Document” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.5 of the
AGTA.

“Airframe Price” has
the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.1 of the AGTA.

“ATA” has the meaning
set forth in Section 1 to Part 3 of the Customer Support Document.

“Authorized Agent” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Average Direct Hourly Labor
Rate” has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“BFE Provisions
Document” means the Buyer Furnished Equipment Provisions Document
attached to the AGTA as Exhibit A.

“Boeing” has the
meaning set forth in the recital of the AGTA.

“Boeing Product” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Buyer Furnished Equipment”
or “BFE” has the meaning set forth in Section 1.2 of the
AGTA.

“Correct” or
“Correction” has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Corrected Boeing
Product” has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Customer” has the
meaning set forth in the recital of the AGTA.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

“Deposit” means the
deposit made by Customer in respect of an Aircraft pursuant to Section 4.1 of
the Purchase Agreement.

“Detail Specification”
means the Detail Specification identified in Exhibit A to the Purchase
Agreement, as the same is amended from time to time by Boeing and Customer
pursuant to Article 4 of the AGTA.

“Development Changes”
has the meaning set forth in Section 4.2 of the AGTA.

“Direct Labor” has the
meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Direct Materials” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Documents” has the
meaning set forth in AGTA-AAL, within the first paragraph of section 1 of Part 3
of Exhibit B to the Customer Support Document.

           “Engine” means each of
the two engines installed on the Aircraft and identified on Table 1 to the
Purchase Agreement, together with any and all Parts incorporated or installed in
or attached to each such engine.

“Engine Price” has the
meaning set forth in Section 2.1.3 of the AGTA.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

“Engine Supplier”
means the manufacturer of the Engine.

“Escalation
Adjustment” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.5 of the
AGTA.

“Excusable Delay” has
the meaning set forth in Section 7.1 of the AGTA.

“FAA” means the
Federal Aviation Administration of the United States of America and any agency
or instrumentality of the United States government succeeding to its
functions.

“Failed Component” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 to the Product Assurance
Document.

“Failure” has the
meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 to the Product Assurance
Document.

“Federal Aviation
Regulations” means the regulations promulgated by the FAA from time to
time and any official interpretations thereof.

“Field Services” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 2 to the Customer Support
Document.

“Governmental
Authority” means any federal, state, county, local or foreign
governmental entity or municipality or subdivision thereof or any authority,
arbitrator, department, commission, board, bureau, body, agency, court or other
agency or instrumentality thereof.

“Governmental
Regulations” means: (1) the Type Certificate for the Aircraft; (2) any
other certification, license or approval issued or required for the Aircraft by
the FAA or any other Governmental Authority having jurisdiction over Boeing or
the Aircraft; (3) any other law, rule, order or regulation of the United States
Government or any agency or instrumentality thereof, having jurisdiction over
the Aircraft or Boeing; (4) all regulations and official interpretations of the
certification, license, or approval requirements described in (1), (2) and (3)
above; and (5) all airworthiness directives issued by the FAA.

“Interface Problem”
has the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 5 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Manufacturer Change”
has the meaning set forth in Section 3.2.1 of the AGTA.

“Operator Changes” has
the meaning set forth in Section 3.3.1 of the AGTA.

“Optional Features”
means those Parts identified as optional features in the Detail
Specification.

“Optional Features
Prices” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1.2 of the
AGTA.

“Parts” means any and
all appliances, parts, instruments, appurtenances, accessories, furnishings, and
other equipment or property of whatever nature incorporated or installed in or
attached to an Aircraft upon delivery or otherwise pursuant to the Purchase
Agreement.

“Performance
Guarantees” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.4 of the
AGTA.

“Person” means an
individual, partnership, corporation, business trust, joint stock company,
trust, unincorporated association, joint venture, Governmental Authority or
other entity of whatever nature.

“Policy” has the
meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Product Assurance
Document” means the Product Assurance Document attached to the AGTA as
Exhibit C.

“Proprietary
Information” has the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 5 to the
Customer Support Document.

“Proprietary
Materials” has the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 5 to the
Customer Support Document.

“Purchase Agreement”
means Purchase Agreement No. 3219, of even date herewith, between Boeing and
Customer for the purchase of the Aircraft, including, without limitation, the
AGTA and any exhibits, schedules, attachments, supplements, amendments and
letter agreements to such Purchase Agreement.

“Scheduled Delivery
Month” means, with respect to an Aircraft, the scheduled month and year
of delivery for such Aircraft as set forth in Section 2 of the Purchase
Agreement.

“Seller Furnished Equipment”
or “SFE” means those Parts incorporated or installed in, or attached to,
the Aircraft by Boeing and designated as “seller furnished
equipment.”

“Seller Purchased Equipment”
or “SPE” means those Parts incorporated or installed in, or attached to,
the Aircraft by Boeing and designated as “seller purchased
equipment.”

“SLP Component” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 3 of Product Assurance
Document.

“Standard Airworthiness
Certificate” means a standard airworthiness certificate for transport
category aircraft applicable to an Aircraft issued by the FAA pursuant to Part
21 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (or any successor
regulations).

“Stipulated Rate” has
the meaning set forth in Section 1.3 of Letter Agreement No.
6-1162-TRW-0670.

“Supplier Product” has
the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance Document.

“Suppliers” has the
meaning set forth in Section 1 of Part 4 of the Product Assurance
Document.

“Taxes” has the
meaning set forth in Section 2.2 of the AGTA.

“Type Certificate”
means a type certificate for transport category aircraft issued by the FAA
pursuant to Part 21 of the Federal Aviation Regulations or any successor
regulation.
“Warranty Inspections”
has the meaning set forth in Part 1 of the Product Assurance
Document.


II.           Interpretive
Provisions.

When
reference is made to an article, section, attachment, exhibit, schedule or
supplement of the “AGTA” or a “Purchase Agreement” without further reference to
a particular letter agreement, attachment, exhibit, schedule or supplement
thereto, such reference shall be deemed to be a reference to the main text of
the AGTA or such Purchase Agreement, respectively.



P.A. No. 3219
                                                               
C- 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138D
26
ex10138d.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138d.htm






 



 






 



ESCALATION
ADJUSTMENT


AIRFRAME AND OPTIONAL
FEATURES


between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit AE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A. No.
3219
                                                            
AE1 
PA_Supp_EX_AE1_ECI-W_2006
  Rev.: 2/18/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 




 



 






 




1.           Formula.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



































 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


iii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


iv.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


v.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


vi.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





2.           Values to be Utilized in the
Event of Unavailability.

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]





 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]







P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
AE1- 
PA_Supp_EX_AE1_ECI-W_2006
  Rev.: 2/18/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 




 



 






 






EX-10.138E
27
ex10138e.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138e.htm






 



 






 




BUYER
FURNISHED EQUIPMENT VARIABLES

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit BFE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219





P.A. No.
3219                                                          
BFE1
PA_Supp_Ex_BFE1 Rev.:
4/10/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



BUYER
FURNISHED EQUIPMENT VARIABLES

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787 AIRCRAFT


This
Supplemental Exhibit BFE1 contains vendor selection dates, on-dock dates and
other requirements applicable to the Aircraft.

1.           Supplier
Selection.

Customer will select and notify Boeing
of the suppliers of the following items by the following dates:





[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
 


 
[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
 




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






2.           Certification
Document.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]




3.Import

Customer
will insure that Customer’s BFE suppliers provide sufficient information to
enable Boeing, when acting as Importer of Record for Customer’s BFE, to comply
with all applicable provisions of the U.S. Customs Service.





P.A. No.
3219BFE1-
PA_Supp_Ex_BFE1 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 




4.           Delivery Dates and Other
Information

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

Item                                                              Preliminary On-Dock
Dates






Premium Class (PC)
      Seats


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]











 
      


Lifevests[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





(As
specified in Option Number ____________)






 
      


Galley
      Meal Carts[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
      COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
    TREATMENT]





(As
specified in Option Number ____________)





P.A. No.
3219BFE1-
PA_Supp_Ex_BFE1 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138F
28
ex10138f.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138f.htm






 



 






 



787 CUSTOMER SUPPORT
DOCUMENT

between

THE BOEING
COMPANY

And

AMERICAN AIRLINES,
INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit CS1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219


This document
contains:

Part
1:                 Boeing
Maintenance and Flight Training Programs

Part
2:                 Field
and Engineering Support Services

Part
3:                 Technical
Information and Materials

Part
4:                 Alleviation
or Cessation of Performance





 
      


Part
      5:


Protection
      of Proprietary Information and Proprietary
  Materials








P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1 Rev.: 3/23/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 




787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

Boeing is
pleased to provide to Customer the services and support set forth in this
Supplemental Exhibit CS1 will be provided by Boeing to Customer as part of its
continuing commitment to the global support of Boeing’s aircraft and products
during a period commencing with delivery of the first Aircraft and continuing so
long as at least one Aircraft is regularly operated by Customer in commercial
air transport service.

PART 1:                             BOEING MAINTENANCE AND FLIGHT
TRAINING
PROGRAMS


1.           Boeing Training
Programs.

Boeing will provide maintenance
training, cabin attendant training, and flight training programs to support the
introduction of the Aircraft into service as provided in this Supplemental
Exhibit CS1.

1.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

1.2           In
addition to the training provided in Article 1.1, Boeing will provide to
Customer the following training and services:

1.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

1.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





1.2.3


Additional
      Flight Operations Services:









 
      


a.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT];









 
      


b.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


c.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           Training Schedule and
Curricula.

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Location of
Training.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. Customer shall decide on the location or mix of
locations for training, subject to space being available in the desired courses
at the selected training facility on the dates desired.

3.2           If
requested by Customer, Boeing will conduct the classroom portions of the
maintenance and flight training (except for the Performance Engineer training
courses) at a mutually acceptable alternate training site, subject to the
following conditions:

3.2.1                      Customer
will provide acceptable classroom space, simulators (as necessary for flight
training) and training equipment required to present the courses;

3.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
3.2.3                      Customer
will reimburse Boeing for, or, subject to the terms and conditions mutually
agreed upon prior to Boeing providing the instructors to teach the course,
Customer shall provide round-trip transportation for Boeing’s instructors and
shipping of training Materials, which must be shipped to the alternate training
site.

3.2.4                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].  Boeing will use commercially reasonable
efforts to notify Customer prior to commencement of training of any such fees,
duties, licenses, permits and similar charges of which Boeing has knowledge;
and

3.2.5                      Those
portions of training that require the use of training devices not available at
the alternate site will be conducted at Boeing's facility or at some other
alternate site. Customer will be responsible for additional expenses, if any,
which result from the use of such alternate site.


4.           Additional Terms and
Conditions.

4.1           All
training will reflect an airplane configuration defined by
(i)  Boeing’s standard configuration specification for 787 aircraft,
(ii)  Boeing’s standard configuration specification for the minor
model of 787 aircraft selected by Customer, and (iii) any Optional Features
selected by Customer from Boeing’s standard catalog of Optional Features. Upon
Customer’s request, Boeing may provide training customized to reflect other
elements of Customer’s Aircraft configuration subject to a mutually acceptable
price, schedule, scope of work and other applicable terms and
conditions.

4.2           All
training will be provided in the English language. If translation is required
for the Customer’s personnel, Customer will provide interpreters.

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], Boeing will transport Customer’s personnel between
their local lodgings and Boeing’s training facility.

4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. These foregoing restrictions will not apply to
ferry assistance or revenue service training services (it being agreed that in
conjunction with such services, the number of hours each Boeing flight
instructor works shall be mutually agreed to and shall be in accordance with FAA
rules and regulations).

4.5           Normal Line Maintenance is
defined as line maintenance that Boeing might reasonably be expected to furnish
for flight crew training at Boeing's facility, and will include ground support
and Aircraft storage in the open, but will not include provision of spare parts.
Boeing will provide Normal Line Maintenance services for any Aircraft while the
Aircraft is used for flight crew training at Boeing's facility in accordance
with the Boeing Maintenance Plan (Boeing document D6-82076) and the Repair
Station Operation and Inspection Manual (Boeing document D6-25470). Customer
will provide such services if flight crew training is conducted elsewhere.
Regardless of the location of such training, Customer will be responsible for
providing all maintenance items (other than those included in Normal Line
Maintenance) required during the training, including, but not limited to, fuel,
oil, landing fees and spare parts.

4.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.7           If
the flight training is based at Boeing's facility, several airports in the
surrounding area may be used, at Boeing’s option. Unless otherwise agreed in the
flight training planning conference, it will be Customer's responsibility to
make arrangements for the use of such airports.

4.8           If
Boeing agrees to make arrangements on behalf of Customer for the use of airports
for flight training, Boeing will pay on Customer's behalf any landing fees
charged by any airport used in conjunction with the flight training. At least
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT] before flight training, Customer will
provide Boeing an open purchase order against which Boeing will invoice Customer
for any landing fees Boeing paid on Customer's behalf. The invoice will be
submitted to Customer [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], when all
landing fee charges have been received and verified. Customer will pay the
invoiced amount to Boeing [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.9           If
requested by Boeing, in order to provide the flight training or ferry flight
assistance, Customer will make available to Boeing an Aircraft after delivery to
familiarize Boeing instructor or ferry flight crew personnel with such Aircraft.
If flight of the Aircraft is required for any Boeing instructor or ferry flight
crew member to maintain an FAA license for flight proficiency or landing
currency, Boeing will be responsible for the costs of fuel, oil, landing fees
and spare parts attributable to that portion of the flight.




P.A. No.
3219                                                           
CS1                                                                     Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
1 -




 



 






 



787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART 2:                      FIELD
AND ENGINEERING SUPPORT SERVICES


1.           Field Service
Representation.

Boeing will furnish field service
representation to advise Customer with respect to the maintenance and operation
of the Aircraft (Field Service
Representatives).

1.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.2           When
a Field Service Representative is positioned at Customer’s facility, Customer
will provide, at no charge to Boeing, suitable furnished office space and office
equipment, including internet capability for electronic access of data, at the
location where Boeing is providing Field Service Representatives. As required,
Customer will assist each Field Service Representative with visas, work permits,
customs, mail handling, identification passes and formal introduction to local
airport authorities.

1.3           Boeing’s
Field Service Representatives are assigned to various airports and other
locations around the world. Whenever Customer's Aircraft are operating through
any such airport, the services of Boeing's Field Service Representatives are
available to Customer.

1.4           Boeing
may from time to time, with Customer’s agreement, provide additional support
services in the form of Boeing personnel visiting Customer’s facilities to work
with Customer’s personnel in an advisory capacity.

2.           Engineering Support
Services.

2.1           Boeing
will, if requested by Customer, provide technical advisory assistance from the
Seattle area or at a base designated by Customer as appropriate for any Aircraft
or Boeing Product (as defined in Part 1 of Exhibit C of the AGTA). Technical
advisory assistance, provided, will include:

2.1.1                      Analysis
of the information provided by Customer to determine the probable nature and
cause of operational problems and suggestion of possible solutions;

2.1.2                      Analysis
of the information provided by Customer to determine the nature and cause of
unsatisfactory schedule reliability and the suggestion of possible
solutions;

2.1.3                      Analysis
of the information provided by Customer to determine the nature and cause of
unsatisfactory maintenance costs and the suggestion of possible
solutions;

2.1.4                      Analysis
and commentary on Customer's engineering releases relating to structural repairs
not covered by Boeing's Structural Repair Manual including those repairs
requiring advanced composite structure design;

2.1.5                      Analysis
and commentary on Customer's engineering proposals for changes in, or
replacement of, systems, parts, accessories or equipment manufactured to
Boeing's detailed design. Boeing will not analyze or comment on any major
structural change unless Customer's request for such analysis and comment
includes complete detailed drawings, substantiating information (including any
information required by applicable government agencies), all stress or other
appropriate analyses, and a specific statement from Customer of the substance of
the review and the response requested;

2.1.6                      Evaluation
of Customer's technical facilities, tools and equipment for servicing and
maintaining 787 aircraft, recommendation of changes where necessary and
assistance in the formulation of an initial maintenance plan for the
introduction of the first Aircraft into service;

2.1.7                      Assistance
with the analysis and preparation of performance data to be used in establishing
operating practices and policies for Customer’s operation of
Aircraft;

2.1.8                      Assistance
with interpretation of the minimum equipment list, the definition of the
configuration deviation list and the analysis of individual Aircraft
performance;

2.1.9                      Assistance
with solving operational problems associated with delivery and route-proving
flights;

2.1.10  Information
regarding significant service items relating to Aircraft performance or flight
operations;

2.1.11                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],

2.1.12                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

2.2.1                      Boeing
may rely upon the commitment authority of the Customer's personnel requesting
the work.

2.2.2                      As
title and risk of loss has passed to Customer, the insurance provisions of
Article 8.2 of the AGTA apply.

2.2.3                      The
provisions of the Boeing warranty in Part 2 of Exhibit C of the AGTA
apply.

2.2.4                      Customer
will pay Boeing for requested work not covered by the Boeing warranty, if
any.

2.2.5                      The
DISCLAIMER AND
RELEASE and EXCLUSION OF CONSEQUENTIAL
AND OTHER DAMAGES provisions in Article 11 of Part 2 of Exhibit C of the
AGTA apply.

2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






P.A. No.
3219                                                           
CS1                                                                     Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
2 -




 



 






 



787           CUSTOMER
SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART 3:                      TECHNICAL
INFORMATION AND MATERIALS


1.           General.

Materials are defined as any
and all items that are created by Boeing or a third party, which are provided
directly or indirectly from Boeing and serve primarily to contain, convey or
embody information. Materials may include either tangible embodiments (for
example, documents or drawings), or intangible embodiments (for example,
software and other electronic forms) of information but excludes Aircraft
Software. Aircraft
Software is defined as software that is installed on and used in the
operation of the Aircraft.

Customer Information is defined as that
data provided by Customer to Boeing which falls into one of the following
categories: (i) aircraft operational information (including, but not limited to,
flight hours, departures, schedule reliability, engine hours, number of
aircraft, aircraft registries, landings, and daily utilization and schedule
interruptions for Boeing model aircraft); (ii) summary and detailed shop
findings data; (iii) aircraft readiness log data; (iv) non-conformance reports;
(v) line maintenance data; (vi) airplane message data, (vii) scheduled
maintenance data, and (viii) service bulletin incorporation.

           Upon
execution by Customer of Boeing’s standard form Customer Services General Terms
Agreement and Supplemental Agreement for Electronic Access Boeing will provide
to Customer through electronic access certain Materials to support the
maintenance and operation of the Aircraft. Such Materials will, if applicable,
be prepared generally in accordance with Air Transport Association of America
(ATA) iSpec 2200, entitled "Information Standards for Aviation Maintenance" not
covered by iSpec 2200 will be provided in a structure suitable for the
Material’s intended use. Materials will be in English and in the units of
measure used by Boeing to manufacture an Aircraft.

2.           Materials Planning
Conferences.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].







3.           Technical Data and
Maintenance Information.

Boeing
will provide technical data and maintenance information equivalent to that
traditionally provided in the following manuals and documents. The format for
this data and information is not yet determined in all cases. Whenever possible,
Boeing will provide such data and information through electronic
access.





 
      


a)


Flight Operations
      Information.








 
      


Airplane
      Flight Manual








 
      


Operations
      Manual and Checklist








 
      


Weight
      and Balance Manual








 
      


Dispatch
      Deviation Procedures Guide and Master Minimum Equipment
    List








 
      


Flight
      Crew Training Manual








 
      


Fault
      Reporting Manual








 
      


Performance
      Engineer's Manual








 
      


Jet
      Transport Performance Methods








 
      


FMC
      Supplemental Data Document








 
      


Operational
      Performance Software








 
      


ETOPS
      Guide Vol. III








 
      


Flight
      Planning and Performance Manual









 
      


b)


Maintenance
      Information.








 
      


Maintenance
      Manual








 
      


Wiring
      Diagram Manual








 
      


Systems
      Schematics Manual








 
      


Structural
      Repair Manual








 
      


Component
      Maintenance Manual








 
      


Standard
      Overhaul Practices Manual








 
      


Standard
      Wiring Practices Manual








 
      


Non-Destructive
      Test Manual








 
      


Service
      Bulletins and Index








 
      


Corrosion
      Prevention Manual








 
      


Fault
      Isolation Manual








 
      


Power
      Plant Buildup Manual (except Rolls
Royce)








 
      


All
      Operators Letters








 
      


Service
      Letters








 
      


Structural
      Item Interim Advisory








 
      


Combined
      Index








 
      


Maintenance
      Tips








 
      


Configuration
      Data Base Generator User Guide








 
      


Production
      Management Data Base








 
      


Baggage/Cargo
      Loading Manual










c)  


Maintenance
      Planning.




Maintenance
Review Board Report




 
      


Maintenance
      Planning Data Document








 
      


Maintenance
      Task Cards and Index








 
      


Maintenance
      Inspection Intervals Report








 
      


ETOPS
      Guide Vol. II








 
      


Configuration
      Maintenance and Procedures for Extended Range
  Operations





d)           Spares
Information.
Illustrated
Parts Catalog
Standards
Books

e)           Airplane & Airport
Information.




 
      


Facilities
      and Equipment Planning Document








 
      


Special
      Tool & Ground Handling Equipment Drawings &
  Index








 
      


Supplementary
      Tooling Documentation








 
      


Illustrated
      Tool and Equipment List/Manual








 
      


Aircraft
      Recovery Document








 
      


Airplane
      Characteristics for Airport Planning
Document








 
      


Airplane
      Rescue and Fire Fighting Document








 
      


Engine
      Ground Handling Document








 
      


ETOPS
      Guide Vol. I





f)           Shop
Maintenance.




 
      


Service
      Bulletins








 
      


Component
      Maintenance Manuals and Index








 
      


Publications
      Index








 
      


Product
      Support Supplier Directory




Supplier
Product Support and Assurance Agreements

g)           Fleet
Statistical Data and Reporting.
Fleet
Message and Fault Data views, charts, and reports

4.           Advance Representative
Materials.

Boeing will select all advance
representative Materials from available sources and whenever possible will
provide them through electronic access. Such advance Materials will be for
advance planning purposes only.

5.           Customized
Materials.

All customized Materials will reflect
the configuration of each Aircraft as delivered.

6.           Revisions.

6.1           The
schedule for updating certain Materials will be identified in the planning
conference. Such updates will reflect changes to Materials developed by
Boeing.

7.           Supplier Technical
Data.

7.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2           The
provisions of this Article will not be applicable to items of BFE.

7.3           Boeing
will furnish to Customer a document identifying the terms and conditions of the
product support agreements between Boeing and its suppliers requiring the
suppliers to fulfill Customer's requirements for information and services in
support of the Aircraft.  Boeing will provide revisions to such
document from time to time.

8.           Buyer Furnished Equipment
Data.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

9.           Customer's Shipping
Address.

From time to time Boeing may furnish
certain Materials or updates to Materials by means other than electronic access.
Customer will specify a single address and Customer shall promptly notify Boeing
of any change to that address. Boeing will pay the reasonable shipping costs of
the Materials. Customer is responsible for any customs clearance charges,
duties, and taxes.



P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1 Rev.: 3/23/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
3-



 



 






 




787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART
4:                      ALLEVIATION
OR CESSATION OF PERFORMANCE


Boeing
will not be required to provide any services, training or other things at a
facility designated by Customer if any of the following conditions
exist:





 
      


1.


a
      labor stoppage or dispute at such facility is in progress involving
      Customer;









 
      


2.


wars
      or warlike operations, riots or insurrections in the country where the
      facility is located;









 
      


3.


any
      condition at the facility which, in the opinion of Boeing, is detrimental
      to the general health, welfare or safety of its personnel or their
      families;









 
      


4.


the
      United States Government refuses permission to Boeing personnel or their
      families to enter into the country where the facility is located, or
      recommends that Boeing personnel or their families leave the
      country.





Boeing
will not be required to provide any Materials, services, training or other
things at a facility designated by Customer if the United States Government
refuses permission to Boeing to deliver such Materials, services, training or
other things to the country where the facility is located.

After the
location of Boeing personnel at the facility, Boeing further reserves the right,
upon the occurrence of any of such events, to immediately and without prior
notice to Customer relocate its personnel and their families.






P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1 Rev.: 3/23/07
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
4-1 



 



 






 




787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART
5:                      PROTECTION
OF PROPRIETARY INFORMATION
AND PROPRIETARY
MATERIALS


1.           General.

All Materials provided by Boeing to
Customer and not covered by a Boeing CSGTA or other agreement between Boeing and
Customer defining Customer's right to use and disclose the Materials and
included information will be covered by and subject to the terms of the AGTA as
amended by the terms of the Purchase Agreement. Title to all Materials
containing, conveying or embodying confidential, proprietary or trade secret
information (Proprietary Information) belonging to Boeing or a third party
(Proprietary Materials), will at all times remain with Boeing or such third
party. Customer will treat all Proprietary Materials and all Proprietary
Information in confidence and use and disclose the same only as specifically
authorized in the AGTA as amended by the terms of the Purchase
Agreement.

2.           License
Grant.

2.1           So
long as Customer owns and operates at least one 787 Aircraft, [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1                                                                 Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
5- 

 



 






 





3.           Use of Proprietary Materials
and Proprietary Information.

Customer is authorized to use
Proprietary Materials and Proprietary Information for the purpose of: (a)
operation, maintenance, repair, or modification of Customer's Aircraft for which
the Proprietary Materials and Proprietary Information have been specified by
Boeing and (b) development and manufacture of training devices and maintenance
tools for use by Customer (c) the manufacture or redesign of any spare part when
permitted under the provisions of the Customer Services General Terms Agreement
between Boeing and Customer, and then only to the extent expressly permitted
therein.  Upon the resale or lease of any Aircraft by Customer, the
purchaser or lessee of such Aircraft may receive from Customer and may use any
Documents furnished hereunder, subject, however, to the foregoing limitations
and any applicable requirements of Article 9 of the AGTA.

4.           Providing of Proprietary
Materials to Contractors.

Customer is authorized to provide
Proprietary Materials to Customer's contractors for the sole purpose of (a)
maintenance, repair, or modification of Customer's Aircraft for which the
Proprietary Materials have been specified by Boeing. In addition, Customer may
provide Proprietary Materials to Customer's contractors for the sole purpose of
(b) developing and manufacturing training devices (c) manufacture or redesign of
any spare part when permitted under the provisions of the Customer Services
General Terms Agreement between Boeing and Customer, and then only to the extent
expressly permitted therein; and (d) developing training programs as
contemplated by Part 1 Section 4 herein and (e) maintenance tools for Customer's
use. Before providing Proprietary Materials to its contractor, Customer will
first obtain a written agreement from the contractor by which the contractor
agrees (a) to use the Proprietary Materials only on behalf of Customer, (b) to
be bound by all of the restrictions and limitations of this Part 5, and (c) that
Boeing is a third party beneficiary under the written agreement. Customer agrees
to provide copies of all such written agreements to Boeing upon request, and
Customer will cooperate with all reasonable requests of Boeing in connection
with enforcing any breach of those agreements by a contractor. A sample
agreement acceptable to Boeing is attached as Appendix V to the
AGTA.

5.           Providing of Proprietary
Materials and Proprietary Information to Regulatory
Agencies.

5.1           When
and to the extent required by a government regulatory agency having jurisdiction
over Customer or an Aircraft, Customer is authorized to provide Proprietary
Materials and to disclose Proprietary Information to the agency for use in
connection with Customer's operation, maintenance, repair, or modification of
such Aircraft. Customer agrees to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
agency from making any distribution, disclosure, or additional use of the
Proprietary Materials and Proprietary Information provided or disclosed.
Customer further agrees to notify Boeing immediately upon learning of any (a)
distribution, disclosure, or additional use by the agency, (b) request to the
agency for distribution, disclosure, or additional use, or (c) intention on the
part of the agency to distribute, disclose, or make additional use of
Proprietary Materials or Proprietary Information.

5.2           In
the event of an Aircraft or Aircraft systems-related incident, the Customer may
suspend, or block access to Customer Information pertaining to its Aircraft or
fleet. Such suspension may be for an indefinite period of time.

6.           Training
Materials.

Training Materials will be provided for
each student.  Such Materials may be used only for either (i) the
individual student’s reference or (ii) Customer’s provision of training to
individuals directly employed by the Customer.






P.A. No.
3219                                                                
CS1                                                                 Rev.:
3/23/07 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 
5- 

 



 






 






EX-10.138G-H
29
ex10138g-h.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138g-h.htm






 



 






 




ENGINE
ESCALATION
AND
ENGINE
WARRANTY

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit EE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219






P.A. No.
3219
                                                            
EE1 
BOEING PROPRIETARY


 



 






 



1.           ENGINE
ESCALATION.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

























 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iv.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



v.            [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





 
      


vi.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





2.           Values to be Utilized in the
Event of Unavailability.

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



























 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





3.            Engine Warranty and Product
Support Plan

3.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].










































P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



ENGINE
ESCALATION
AND
ENGINE
WARRANTY

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit EE1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219





P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



1.           ENGINE
ESCALATION.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]






































[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




























 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


iv.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













 
      


v.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


vi.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









2.


Values to be Utilized
      in the Event of
Unavailability.





2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





 
      


Note:


i.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




























 
      


ii.


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





3.            Engine Warranty and Product
Support Plan.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219
                                                        
EE1 - 
BOEING PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138I
30
ex10138i.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138i.htm






 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 



SERVICE
LIFE POLICY COMPONENTS

between

THE
BOEING COMPANY

and

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


Supplemental
Exhibit SLP1 to Purchase Agreement Number 3219




P.A. No.
3219                                                              
SLP1
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
06/28/04
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 



SERVICE
LIFE POLICY COMPONENTS

relating
to

BOEING
MODEL 787 AIRCRAFT


This is
the listing of Covered Components for the Aircraft which relate to Part 3, Boeing Service Life
Policy of Exhibit C, Product Assurance
Document to the AGTA and is a part of Purchase Agreement No.
3219.





1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(h)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(j)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(k)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(l)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(m)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









2.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(h)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(j)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219                                                            
SLP1-
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
12/15/06
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 








3.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









4.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


5.


Engine
      Strut.









 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219                                                            
SLP1-
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
12/15/06
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


[Model 787
Only:]
 







 
      


6.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(g)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(h)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


7.


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(e)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









 
      


(f)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









NOTE:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219                                                            
SLP1-
PA_Supp_Ex_SLP1_787 Rev.:
12/15/06
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138J
31
ex10138j.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138j.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-01   Page
2



3219-01


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc.
(Customer)





Customer
Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (the CSGTA) between Boeing and
Customer, including Supplemental Agreement for Electronic Access (the
“SA-EA”)


This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.





1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE




COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.            Boeing
will license and install these Materials on the following
conditions:





 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].










 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













3.           The
technical data and maintenance information specified in Article 3 of Part 3 of
Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the Purchase Agreement will be considered
“Materials” as defined therein and not “Aircraft Software” even when such
technical data and maintenance information is provided in software media and is
used onboard the Aircraft or loaded into an onboard Aircraft
system.

4.           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                          





P.A. No.
3219
787
e-Enabling Letter Agreement
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138K
32
ex10138k.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138k.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
 
3219-02    Page
2
 



3219-02

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616



Subject:                      Special
Terms - Seats and In-flight Entertainment






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787
      aircraft (the Aircraft)







This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All capitalized terms used but not defined in this Letter
Agreement shall have the same meaning as defined in the Purchase
Agreement.

1.Definitions.

1.1           “Covered Seats” shall
mean those seats which are not otherwise identified in Exhibit A to the
Purchase Agreement as Buyer Furnished Equipment.

1.2           “In-flight Entertainment
(IFE) System” shall mean the IFE identified in the Detail
Specification of the Aircraft, inclusive of the IFE software which is required
to test and certify the IFE system on the Aircraft, but exclusive of IFE
Customer Software. 

1.3           “IFE Customer Software” shall
mean any software which is obtained by the Customer from a source other
than Boeing for installation in the IFE System.





2.


Applicability of the
      Provisions of Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the Purchase
      Agreement.





2.1           Notwithstanding
the provisions of Article 7.3 of Part 3 of Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to the
Purchase Agreement, [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

2.2           Customer
is hereby advised that the revision service for Materials does not include
changes applicable to the Covered Seats and IFE System.



3.           Applicability of the
Provisions of Exhibit C to the AGTA.

In lieu of the provisions of Part 4 of
Exhibit C to the AGTA, the following warranty and patent and copyright
indemnities will apply to Covered Seats and the IFE System:
“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”

4.           IFE Customer
Software.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC

By                                          

Its                                           




P.A. No.
3219 70820
Special
Terms - Seats and In-flight Entertainment 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138L
33
ex10138l.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138l.htm






 



 






 



3219-04

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616







Subject:


Product
      Assurance - First-Look Inspection
Program









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787
      aircraft





This
Letter Agreement amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement. All terms used
but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the
Purchase Agreement.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.           Warranty
Period.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:
Article
3.1.1 as set forth below is hereby added to Part 2 of Exhibit C to the
AGTA:



P.A. No.
3219
Product
Assurance – First-Look Warranty Program
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-04   Page





“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:




 
      

 



2.       Customer's
Obligations.

Article
6.2.1 of Part 2 of Exhibit C to the AGTA is amended to add the following
provision:
 
“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

3.           Service Life
Policy.

Article
2.2 of Part 3 of Exhibit C to the AGTA is amended to read as
follows:

“2.2.1





(i)  


For
      the 787 aircraft only:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






(ii)  


For
      all other aircraft models:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].















2.2.2





(i)  


For
      the 787 aircraft only:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





(ii)  


For
      all other aircraft models:





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”


Article 3
of Part 3 of Exhibit C to the AGTA is amended to read as follows:

“3.           Price
The price
Customer will pay for replacement of a failed SLP Component will be calculated
pursuant to the following formulas:





(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:






(ii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to matters described above, please indicate your acceptance and approval
below.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By
_______________________

Its Attorney-In-Fact


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
 ,
2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By  ___________________

Its
____________________




P.A. No.
3219
Product
Assurance – First-Look Warranty Program
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138M
34
ex10138m.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138m.htm






 



 






 



3219-05

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616

Subject:                      Spare
Parts Commitments





Reference:


a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)









 
      


b)


Customer
      Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (CSGTA) between Boeing and
      Customer





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into as of the date set forth below, and amends and
supplements the CSGTA solely for purposes of
Boeing 787 aircraft.  All capitalized terms
used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the
CSGTA, except for “Aircraft” which will have the meaning as defined in the
Purchase Agreement. Unless otherwise stated all references in this Letter
Agreement to Articles refer to the Articles contained this Letter Agreement. In
consideration of Customer’s purchase of the Aircraft, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.           Definitions.

           1.1           “Customer’s Demand Date” means
the delivery date specified by Customer in its Order to Boeing for a Spare
Part.

           1.2           “Customer Hold Time” means the
period of time between the date on which Boeing requests a decision, information
or act related to a material issue from
Customer and the date Customer provides such decision or information or performs
such act. This includes, but is not limited to time expended (i) waiting for
Customer’s clarification of missing order data or Customer’s approval of
Boeing’s quote for goods or services, (ii) resolving order discrepancies or
technical discrepancies, (iii) obtaining engineering decisions from Customer,
(iv) waiting for receipt of a part which has been shipped to a location other
than the



P.A.
3219
Spare_Parts_Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-05  Page





designated
Boeing service center, and (v) resolving any Boeing constraints on processing an
Order due to the status of Customer’s credit with Boeing.

           1.3           “Beyond Economic Repair” or
“BER” is the term
applied to a part whose repair or overhaul [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

           1.4           “Order Date” means the date on
which an Order is established in accordance with the provisions of the
CSGTA.

           1.5           “Shelf Stock Part” means at any
time a Spares Prone Part that [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

           1.6           “Spares Prone Part” means a
Boeing Spare Part that is identified and recommended by Boeing in its
provisioning data as a part that for the life of the Aircraft can be expected to be
replaced during normal aircraft line maintenance or during overhaul of line
replaceable units due to, failure, wear, deterioration, maintenance, damage,
loss, corrosion, vibration, or temperature.


2.           Delivery Commitment for New
Spare Parts.

           2.1           Boeing
will deliver in accordance with the provisions of the CSGTA within the lead
times specified below, Boeing Spare Parts other than (i) Boeing Spare Parts
ordered as part of Customer’s initial provisioning for an Aircraft or (ii) kits; provided that such Boeing
Spare Parts are Ordered after the execution of this Letter Agreement, and are in
continuous production for an aircraft model in production on the Order
Date.

                      2.1.1                      A
Shelf Stock Part will ship either [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

                      2.1.2                      A
Spares Prone Part that is not a Shelf Stock Part will ship either [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           2.2           For
Boeing Spare Parts not in continuous production on the Order Date, Boeing
will expend reasonable efforts to meet Customer’s Demand Date.


3.           Remedies Regarding
Delivery.

           3.1           If
Boeing anticipates it will be unable to ship a Boeing Spare Part within the
applicable commitment time described in Article 2.1, Boeing may take one or more
of the following actions

3.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           3.3           Subject
to the limitations described in Article 3.4, if Boeing does not satisfy the
requirements of Article 2.1 through one or more of the actions described in
Article 3.1, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           3.4           The
provisions of Article 3.3 will not apply to delay in delivery which is due to
(i) the failure of Customer’s carrier to take possession of the Boeing Spare
Parts, or (ii) is otherwise permitted by applicable law or contract, including
without limitation any provisions relating to excusable delay.

           3.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.           Spare Part Price
Escalation.

           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


5.           Spare Part Price
Formula.

           5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:
 

 
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 

 

           5.2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           5.3           Any
rounding of a number, as required under this Article 5 will be accomplished as
follows: if the first digit of the portion to be dropped from the number to be
rounded is five or greater, the preceding digit will be raised to the next
highest number.


6.           Processing Time Commitment
for Spare Prone Parts Returned for Repair or Overhaul.

6.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. A Spares Prone Part meeting the criteria defined in
this Article 6.1 shall be called a “Qualifying In-Production Spares Prone
Part.”
















6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


7.           Remedies Regarding
Processing Time.

           7.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

7.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

7.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

7.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           7.2           If
as a result of an action described in Article 7.1, Boeing provides to Customer a
suitable repaired or overhauled Qualifying In-Production Spares Prone Part
within the commitment periods described in Article 6.2, or provides
reimbursement in accordance with Article 7.1.3, and in either case, thereafter
completes the applicable contract as soon as such repaired or overhauled part is
available for shipment, Boeing will be deemed to have satisfied the commitments
described in Article 6.2.



           7.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           7.4           The
provisions of Article 7.3 will not apply to delay in delivery which is due to
(i)  Customer Hold Time, (ii) the failure of Customer’s carrier to
take possession of the applicable Qualifying In-Production Spares Prone Part, or
(iii) is otherwise permitted by applicable law or contract, including without
limitation any provisions relating to excusable delay.

           7.5           The
remedies provided in this Article 7 are Customer’s exclusive remedies for
Boeing’s failure to comply with the provisions of Article 6.2 and are in lieu of
all other damages, claims and remedies of Customer arising at law or otherwise
for any failure to meet Customer’s delivery requirements. Customer hereby waives
and renounces all other claims and remedies arising at law or otherwise for any
such failure to meet Customer’s delivery requirements.


8.           Substitution for Obsolete
Spare Parts.

           After
delivery of the first Aircraft, if any unused and undamaged Spare Part purchased
by Customer from Boeing for the Aircraft, or other aircraft in Customer’s fleet
of the same model type, is rendered obsolete and unusable due to a Boeing
initiated change that results in a redesign of the Aircraft or any accessory,
equipment or part thereof, (other than a redesign at Customer’s request),
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


9.           Order of
Precedence.

In the
event of any inconsistency between the terms of this Letter Agreement and the
terms of any other provisions of the CSGTA, the terms of this Letter Agreement
shall control.



P.A.
3219
Spare_Parts_Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-05  Page





10.           Further
Discussions.

Boeing
and Customer agree and understand that Customer may want to pursue other types
of spares provisioning programs, which Boeing may offer now or in the future as
well as a unique program, which Customer may suggest.  Boeing agrees
to enter into good-faith negotiations with Customer on the aforementioned
topics.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By  __________________________

Its     Attorney-In-Fact


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
 ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By  ___________________________

Its   ___________________________




P.A.
3219
Spare_Parts_Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138N
35
ex10138n.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138n.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-06
Page
6



3219-06


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616




Subject:                      Spare
Parts Initial Provisioning





Reference:


a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (the
Aircraft)









 
      


b)


Customer
      Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (CSGTA) between Boeing and
      Customer






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below and amends
and supplements the CSGTA. All capitalized terms used but not defined in this
Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the CSGTA, except for “Aircraft”
which will have the meaning as defined in the Purchase Agreement.

In order
to define the process by which Boeing and Customer will (i) identify those Spare
Parts and Standards critical to Customer’s successful introduction of the
Aircraft into service and its continued operation, (ii) place Orders under the
provisions of the CSGTA as supplemented by the provisions of this Letter
Agreement for those Spare Parts and Standards, and (iii) manage the return of
certain of those Spare Parts which Customer does not use, the parties agree as
follows.

1.           Definitions.

“Provisioning Data” means the
documentation provided by Boeing to Customer, including but not limited to the
Recommended Spare Parts List (RSPL), identifying all Boeing initial provisioning
requirements for the Aircraft.

“Provisioning Items” means the
Spare Parts and Standards identified by Boeing as initial provisioning
requirements in support of the Aircraft, excluding special tools, ground support
equipment (GSE), engines and engine parts.



“Provisioning Products Guide”
means the Boeing Manual D6-81834 entitled “Spares Provisioning Products
Guide”.

2.           Phased
Provisioning.
 
2.1           Provisioning Products
Guide.  Prior to the initial provisioning meeting Boeing will
furnish to Customer a copy of the Provisioning Products Guide.

2.2           Initial Provisioning
Meeting.  On or about twelve (12) months prior to delivery of
the first Aircraft the parties will conduct an initial provisioning meeting
where the procedures, schedules, and requirements for training will be
established to accomplish phased provisioning of Spare Parts and Standards for
the Aircraft in accordance with the Provisioning Products Guide. If the lead
time from execution of the Purchase Agreement until delivery of the first
Aircraft is less than twelve (12) months, the initial provisioning meeting will
be established as soon as reasonably possible after execution of the Purchase
Agreement.

2.3           Provisioning
Data.  During the initial provisioning meeting Customer will
provide to Boeing the operational parameter information described in Chapter 6
of the Provisioning Products Guide. After review and acceptance by Boeing of
such Customer information, Boeing will prepare the Provisioning Data. Such
Provisioning Data will be furnished to Customer on or about [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].after Boeing finalizes the engineering drawings for
the Aircraft. The Provisioning Data will be as complete as possible and will
cover Provisioning Items selected by Boeing for review by Customer for initial
provisioning of Spare Parts and Standards for the Aircraft. Boeing will furnish
to Customer revisions to the Provisioning Data until [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.4           Buyer Furnished Equipment
(BFE) Provisioning Data. Unless otherwise advised by Boeing, Customer
will provide or insure its BFE suppliers provide to Boeing the BFE data in scope
and format acceptable to Boeing, in accordance with the schedule established
during the initial provisioning meeting.

3.           Purchase from Boeing of
Spare Parts and Standards as Initial Provisioning for the
Aircraft.

3.1           Schedule.  In
accordance with schedules established during the initial provisioning meeting,
Customer may place Orders for Provisioning Items and any GSE, special tools, QEC
kits, or engine spare parts, which Customer determines it will initially require
for maintenance, overhaul and servicing of the Aircraft and/or
engines.


3.2           Prices of Initial
Provisioning Spare Parts.

3.2.1  Boeing Spare
Parts.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.2.2  Supplier Spare
Parts.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3           Standards Kits, Raw Material
Kits, Bulk Materials Kits and Service Bulletin Kits.  In
accordance with schedules established during the initial provisioning meeting,
Boeing will furnish to Customer a listing of all components, which could be
included in the Standards kits, raw material kits, bulk materials kits and
service bulletin kits, which may be purchased by Customer from Boeing. Customer
will select, and provide to Boeing its desired content for the kits. Boeing will
furnish to Customer as soon as practicable thereafter a statement setting forth
a firm price for such kits. Customer will place Orders with Boeing for the kits
in accordance with schedules established during the initial provisioning
meeting.

4.           Delivery.

For Spare
Parts and Standards ordered by Customer in accordance with Article 3 of this
Letter Agreement, Boeing will, insofar as reasonably possible, deliver to
Customer such Spare Parts and Standards on dates reasonably calculated to
conform to Customer's anticipated needs in view of the scheduled deliveries of
the Aircraft. Customer and Boeing will agree upon the date to begin delivery of
the provisioning Spare Parts and Standards ordered in accordance with this
Letter Agreement. Where appropriate, Boeing will arrange for shipment of such
Spare Parts and Standards which are manufactured by suppliers directly to
Customer from the applicable supplier's facility. The routing and method of
shipment for initial deliveries and all subsequent deliveries of such Spare
Parts and Standards will be as established at the initial provisioning meeting
and thereafter by mutual agreement.




P.A. No.
3219
Spare_Parts_Initial_ProvisioningRev.:
3/23/05 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-06
Page
6




5.           Substitution for Obsolete
Spare Parts.

5.1           Obligation to Substitute
Pre-Delivery.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.2           Delivery of Obsolete Spare
Parts and Substitutes.  Obsolete
or unusable Spare Parts returned by Customer pursuant to this Article 5 will be
delivered to Boeing F.O.B. at its Seattle Distribution Center or such other
destination as Boeing may reasonably designate. Spare Parts substituted for such
returned obsolete or unusable Spare Parts will be delivered to Customer in
accordance with the CSGTA. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.           Repurchase of Provisioning
Items.

6.1           Obligation to
Repurchase.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.2           Exceptions.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




















6.3           Notification and
Format.  Customer will notify Boeing, in writing when Customer
desires to return Provisioning Items under the provisions of this Article 6.
Customer's notification will include a detailed summary, in part number
sequence, of the Provisioning Items Customer desires to return. Such summary
will be in the form of listings, tapes, diskettes or other media as may be
mutually agreed between Boeing and Customer and will include part number,
nomenclature, purchase order number, purchase order date and quantity to be
returned. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4           Review and Acceptance by
Boeing.  Upon completion of Boeing's review of any detailed
summary submitted by Customer pursuant to Article 6.3, Boeing will issue to
Customer a Material Return Authorization (MRA) for those Provisioning Items
Boeing agrees are eligible for repurchase in accordance with this Article 6.
Boeing will advise Customer of the reason that any Provisioning Item included in
Customer's detailed summary is not eligible for return. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.5           Price and Payment.
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.6           Delivery of Repurchased
Provisioning Items. Provisioning Items repurchased by Boeing pursuant to
this Article 6 will be delivered to Boeing F.O.B. at its Seattle Distribution
Center or such other destination as Boeing may reasonably
designate.





 
      


7.


Title and Risk of
      Loss.





Title and
risk of loss of any Spare Parts or Standards delivered to Customer by Boeing in
accordance with this Letter Agreement will pass from Boeing to Customer in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the CSGTA. Title to and risk of
loss of any Spare Parts or Standards returned to Boeing by Customer in
accordance with this Letter Agreement will pass to Boeing upon delivery of such
Spare Parts or Standards to Boeing in accordance with the provisions of Article
5.2 or Article 6.6, herein, as appropriate.



P.A. No.
3219                                                                                                                     80414
 Rev. 3/23/05
Spare_Parts_Initial_Provisioning
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-06
Page
6








8.


Termination for
      Excusable Delay.





In the
event of termination of the Purchase Agreement pursuant to Article 7 of the AGTA
with respect to any Aircraft, such termination will, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

9.           Order of
Precedence.

In the event of any inconsistency
between the terms of this Letter Agreement and the terms of any other provisions
of the CSGTA, the terms of this Letter Agreement will control.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                             

Its    Attorney-In-Fact


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                             

Its                            



P.A. No.
3219                                                                                                                     80414
 Rev. 3/23/05
Spare_Parts_Initial_Provisioning
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 



 



 






 






EX-10.138O
36
ex10138o.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138o.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-08   Page
3



3219-08


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Open
Configuration Matters






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (the
Aircraft)






This
Letter Agreement amends the Purchase Agreement. All terms used but not defined
in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in the Purchase
Agreement.

1.           Aircraft
Configuration.

           1.1           Initial
Configuration.  The initial configuration of Customer's Model
787-923 Aircraft has been defined by Detail Specification 787B1-4102-Rev B,
July 9, 2007 as described in Article 1 and Exhibit A of the Purchase
Agreement (the Aircraft Configuration). [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.2           Final Configuration
Schedule.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219 80111
Open_Configuration_Matters Rev.:
12/17/03
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-08   Page
3



2.           Effect on Purchase
Agreement.

2.1           Basic
Specification.  Changes applicable to the basic Model 787-9
aircraft which are developed by Boeing between the date of signing of the
Purchase Agreement and completion of the final configuration review described in
paragraph 1.2 above will be incorporated into the Aircraft Configuration by
written amendment.

2.2           Exhibit
A.  The effects of all Options, which are mutually agreed upon
between Boeing and Customer for incorporation into the Aircraft Configuration
will be incorporated into Exhibit A of the Purchase Agreement by written
amendment.

2.3           Performance
Guarantees. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.4           Price
Adjustments.  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Open_Configuration_Matters Rev.:
12/17/03
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
3219-08   Page
3




3.           Purchase Agreement
Amendment.

Within [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]. after reaching agreement as to the final Aircraft Configuration,
Boeing will provide Customer an amendment to the Purchase Agreement reflecting
the effects of the configuration changes agreed to by the parties.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Open_Configuration_Matters Rev.:
12/17/03
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138P
37
ex10138p.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138p.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




6-1162-AKP-071R1


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616


Subject:                                Purchase
Obligations





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement Nos. 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219 (collectively, the
      Purchase Agreements) between The Boeing Company  and American
      Airlines, Inc. relating to Model 737, 757, 767, 777, and 787 aircraft,
      respectively






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below, and
amends and supplements each Purchase Agreement. This Letter Agreement further
evidences and documents Customer’s commitment, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.           Definitions.

Terms used herein and not defined in
this Letter Agreement have the meanings set forth in the Purchase Agreements.
The following terms, when used in capitalized form, have the following
meanings:

“Boeing Aircraft” means any aircraft
within the MTOW Range manufactured by Boeing.

“Boeing Affiliate Aircraft” means any
aircraft within the MTOW Range manufactured by an Affiliate of Boeing such as
McDonnell Douglas Corporation or its successors.

“Existing Customer Aircraft” means any
Boeing Aircraft, Boeing Affiliate Aircraft or Non-Boeing Aircraft, which is
owned, leased or operated by Customer on the date of this Letter
Agreement.

“Non-Boeing Aircraft” means any
aircraft within the MTOW Range that is neither a Boeing Aircraft nor a Boeing
Affiliate Aircraft.




2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Boeing and Customer agree that, except
as provided in this Letter Agreement, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Nothing in this Letter Agreement shall
preclude Customer from:

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




3.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Purchase
Obligations
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




3.7                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.8           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Purchase
Obligations
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-071R1 Page 5




5.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer and Boeing understand that
certain commercial and financial information contained in this Letter Agreement
are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential. Customer and Boeing agree
that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the information contained herein
as confidential and will not, without the prior written consent of the other,
disclose this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein to any other
person or entity, except as provided in this Letter Agreement or in the Purchase
Agreements.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY



By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.



By                                                              

Its                                                              





P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Purchase
Obligations
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138Q
38
ex10138q.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138q.htm






 



 






 



6-1162-AKP-072R2

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616





Subject:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement Nos. 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219 (the Purchase Agreements)
      between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc. relating to Model
      737, 757, 767, 777 and 787 aircraft,
  respectively





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below and amends
and supplements the Purchase Agreements referenced above. All capitalized terms
used herein but not otherwise defined in this Letter Agreement shall have the
same meanings assigned thereto in Exhibit C to the applicable Purchase
Agreement or elsewhere in such Purchase Agreement. This Letter Agreement
supercedes and replaces in its entirety Letter
Agreement  6-1162-AKP-072R1 dated April 23, 2004.


1.           Definitions.

Terms used herein and not defined in
this Letter Agreement have the meanings set forth in the Purchase Agreements.
The following terms, when used in capitalized form, have the following
meanings:

“AA Aircraft” means, as the context
requires, (i) a Firm Aircraft, (ii) a Rights Aircraft, (iii) a Substitute
Aircraft or (iv) any aircraft described in Section 2.2 of this Letter Agreement
once price terms have been established for such aircraft pursuant to Section 8
of this Letter Agreement. The first three categories of aircraft in the
preceding sentence are defined in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075,
6-1162-AKP-089R2, 6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1 and
6-1162-TRW-0664.

“AA Auditor” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 7.2.3 hereto.

“Adjustment” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 3.2 hereto.

“Affiliate” shall have the meaning set
forth in Exhibit C to the Purchase Agreement.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Boeing” for the purposes of this
Letter Agreement, means The Boeing Company and each of its direct  and
indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries.

“Boeing Affiliate Aircraft” has the
meaning set forth in Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-071R1 and includes Existing MDC
Aircraft.

“Boeing Auditor” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 7.2.1 hereto.

“Business Day” shall mean any day other
than a Saturday, Sunday, or a day that commercial banks are authorized or
required by law, regulation or executive order to be closed in Seattle,
Washington or Fort Worth, Texas.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Credit Memorandum” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“Derivative” has the meaning set forth
in Letter Agreements  6-1162-AKP-075, 6-1162-AKP-089R2,
6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1  and 6-1162-TRW-0664 as
applicable.

“Eligible AA Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.1.1 hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Evaluation” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 3.2 hereto.

“Existing MDC Aircraft” means any model
of aircraft within the MTOW Range manufactured by McDonnell Douglas Corporation
prior to October 31, 1997.

“Firm
Aircraft” shall have the meaning set forth in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075,
6-1162-AKP-089R2, 6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1 and 6-1162-TRW-0664, as
applicable.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:





(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









(ii)  


Customer
      has:









a.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









b.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“4Q Certification” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.7.1 hereto.

“Future Boeing Models” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 2.2 hereto.

“Inconsistencies” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“Independent Evaluation” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 7.2.1 hereto.

“Initial Credit Memo” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“Initial Report” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 5.4 hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








“MTOW Range” has the meaning set forth
in Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-071R1.

“Non-Priced Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 2.2 hereto.

“OA Contract” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 7.2.3 hereto.

“OA Scheduled Delivery Date” means the
original scheduled delivery date [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Prospective Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 4.2 hereto.

“Prospective Evaluation” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 4.2 hereto.

“Records” shall have the meaning set
forth in Section 7.2.10 hereto.

“Report Credit Due Date” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.7.2 hereto.

“Report Credit Memo” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 5.7.1 hereto.

“Review Meeting” shall have the meaning
set forth in Section 7.1.1 hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Rights Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075, 6-1162-AKP-089R2,
6-1162-AKP-100R1, 6-1162-AKP-110R1 and 6-1162-TRW-0664, as
applicable.

“Successor Model” has the meaning set
forth in Letter Agreements 6-1162-AKP-075, 6-1162-AKP-089R2, 6-1162-AKP-100R1,
6-1162-AKP-110R1 and 6-1162-TRW-0664, as applicable.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

“Whitetail Aircraft” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section 9.1 hereto.


2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

4.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















4.1.4                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].































5.           Establishing Eligibility for
and Issuing Credit Memoranda.

5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.1.1 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.1.2 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:
5.2.1              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2.2              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2.3              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








5.2.4              [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.2.5              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.3              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.4              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.5              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















5.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7.3             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


6.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].











6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


7.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.1.3             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].










7.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.3             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.4.             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)         [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

(b)         [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



















7.2.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.6                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

7.2.7                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

7.2.8.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.8.4                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.9                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2.10                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







8.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

8.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

8.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].























8.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.3.           [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].
 
9.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

9.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



































9.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


10.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





































11.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer and Boeing understand that
certain commercial and financial information contained in this Letter Agreement
are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential.  Customer and
Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the information
contained herein as confidential and will not, without the prior written consent
of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein
to any other person or entity, except as provided in this Letter Agreement or in
the Purchase Agreements.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY



By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.



By                                                              

Its  VP Corporate
Development and Treasurer






Attachment
    A:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      B:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      C:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      D:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








Attachment
      E:


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 




Examples

1. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




2. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




3. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      

24

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      

0

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




4. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002

 
      

2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 





5. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003

 
      

2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




6. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000

 
      

2002


2003


2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




7. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004

 
      
 
      

2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 





8. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004

 
      

2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

0

 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




9. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004


2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



10. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001


2002

 
      

2004


2005


2006


2007




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 




11. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      

2005


2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




12. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

2006


2007



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      







P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 7 




13. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:





[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      




(i)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      

2005


2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(ii)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TOA REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      

2005


2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(iii)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000


2001

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      

X

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
(iv)
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      

2000

 
      
 
      

2003

 
      

2005


2006


2007


2008




[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
B to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page 1 




Form of
Certification


The
undersigned certifies that he or she is either the President or the Chief
Financial Officer (or functional equivalent) of Boeing Commercial Airplanes, and
that, as such, he or she is authorized to execute this Certification on behalf
of The Boeing Company pursuant to Letter Agreement No. 6-1162-AKP-072R1.
Capitalized terms used herein but not defined have the meanings set forth in the
foregoing Letter Agreement.

The
undersigned hereby certifies that:

A.              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:




 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Notes:

B.              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

In
witness whereof, the undersigned has hereunto subscribed his name this ____ day
of ______________, ___.





By:

 
 






P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
C to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

Prospective
Evaluation for
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

Boeing
has determined that the following are [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
      

Aircraft
Model

 
      

Delivery
      Year



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
D to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      




2. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
D to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page





4. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
E to
6-1162-AKP-072R2
Page
1




Form of
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. (with example data)

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      



Form of
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]. (with example data)

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 






EX-10.138R
39
ex10138r.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138r.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-AKP-073R1  Page
4




6-1162-AKP-073R1


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616


Subject:                                Accident
Claims and Litigation





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement Nos. 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219 (collectively, the
      Purchase Agreements) between The Boeing Company and American Airlines,
      Inc. relating to Model 737, 757, 767, 777, 787 Aircraft,
      respectively





This letter agreement (Letter
Agreement) is entered into on the date below, and amends and supplements each
Purchase Agreement. Capitalized terms used herein but not otherwise defined
shall have the meanings assigned thereto in Exhibit C to the applicable
Purchase Agreement or elsewhere in such Purchase Agreement.

1.           Scope.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]

2.           Initial
Meeting.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

2.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
3.           Subsequent
Meetings.

The parties will meet periodically
after the initial meeting in order to review [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.           Resolution of Other
Matters.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

8.           Punitive
Damages.
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

9.           Insurance
Coverage.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

10.           Miscellaneous.

10.1           All
rights and obligations of the parties under this Letter Agreement shall accrue
and apply solely to the parties and their successors and permitted assigns and
there is no intent to benefit any third parties.

10.2           Each
party shall do and perform, at such party’s expense, such further acts and
execute and deliver such further instruments and documents as may be required by
applicable law or as may be reasonably requested by the other party to
effectuate the purposes of this Letter Agreement.

10.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                                              

Its                                                              




P.A. Nos.
1977, 1978, 1979, 1980, and 3219
Accident
Claims and Litigation
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138S
40
ex10138s.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138s.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1031  Page
3



6-1162-CLO-1031


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Performance
Guarantee Matters






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








 
      


(b)


Letter
      Agreement No. 6-1162-TRW-0671 entitled Performance Guarantees (the
      Performance Guarantees)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           Performance
Guarantees.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Guarantee Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1031  Page
3



2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


3.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Guarantee Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1031  Page
3




4.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Guarantee Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138T
41
ex10138t.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138t.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1032  Page
6



6-1162-CLO-1032


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








 
      


(b)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 1979 between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc.
      relating to Model 767-323ER
aircraft








 
      


(
      c)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 1980 between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc
      relating to Model 777-223IGW
aircraft








 
      


(d)


Security
      Agreement dated October 16, 2002 between The Boeing Company and American
      Airlines, Inc.






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           Introduction.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      
 
      





2.2                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].











[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


4.           Availability of
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT] Aircraft.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

4.1.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

4.2.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.2.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


5.           Purchase
Obligations.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


6.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


7.           Security Agreement and Other
Subsequent Agreement Amendments.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].














[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1032  Page
6




9.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
understands and agrees that the information contained herein represents
confidential business information and has value precisely because it is not
available generally or to other parties.  Customer agrees to limit the
disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          


Attachments:





1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








2.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








3.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].








4.  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].







P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 




Attachment
1 – 767 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
1 – 767 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
2 – 777 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
2 – 777 MAPD and QADP upon execution of this Letter Agreement

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
3 – 767 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
3 – 767 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
4 – 777 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
4 – 777 MAPD and QADP if no 787s are reconfirmed

Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. X Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                    SA
No. 6 Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-100R1 (Model 767)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1979                                                                                                    SA
No. 6 Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
MADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Months and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1980                                                                                                   SA
No. 17 Page 1 of 1



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-110R1 (Model 777)
QADP
Rights Aircraft Delivery Quarters and Exercise Dates













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


















PA
No.
1980                                  SA
No. 17



P.A. No.
3219
Reconfirmation
Rights                                                     
Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138U
42
ex10138u.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138u.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1039   Page
2



6-1162-CLO-1039

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


Extended
      Warranty Option




 




Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc.
(Customer)




 
 
This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.
 
 




1.  


General.




 
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 




2.  


Extended Warranty
      [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
      COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
    TREATMENT].




 
 




2.1  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
 




2.2  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
 




2.3  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 
 




3.  


Confidential
      Treatment.




 
 
Customer
understands that Boeing considers certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement as confidential.  Customer agrees
that it will treat this Letter Agreement and the information contained herein as
confidential and will not, without the prior written consent of Boeing, disclose
this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein to any other person or
entity, except as required by law or government regulation.
 
 

 
 
Very
truly yours,
 
 

 
THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                          





P.A. No.
3219
Extended
Warranty Option
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138V
43
ex10138v.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138v.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1043  Page





6-1162-CLO-1043


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616

Subject:                      787
Inspection Process





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.





1.  


Inspection
      Process





The AGTA
is hereby amended by adding the following new Section 5.6 immediately following
Section 5.5 of the AGTA for the 787 Aircraft, the intent of which is to define
the 787 inspection process [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the representations,
warranties, indemnities and agreements of Boeing made in the AGTA or the
Purchase Agreement shall not be affected or deemed waived by reason of any
investigation made by Customer pursuant to this Letter Agreement.

“5.6           Inspection
Process.

5.6.1                      787 Inspection
Procedures.

The 787
customer inspection program is similar to other Boeing commercial customer
inspection systems with modifications, which are required to support the
shortened manufacturing cycle of the 787. [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]. Boeing will make available to Customer on a non-disruption and
non-interference basis, access to the 787 Aircraft to perform certain Customer
inspections, pursuant to the Customer Quality Support document in Attachment A
hereto (which may be amended or supplemented from time to time), except as
depicted in paragraph 5.6.2 below.


5.6.2                      General.

CQS will
facilitate Customer’s inspections of the 787 Aircraft during the manufacturing
process through a standard set of hardware inspection opportunities, technical
reviews, and data sharing. As an accommodation for the Customer, [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.  Assignment

This
Letter Agreement is being provided to Customer as an accommodation and cannot be
assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of Boeing,
which such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.




P.A. No.
3219
787
Inspection Process
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1043  Page






3.  Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
understands and agrees that certain commercial and/or financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing as
confidential.  Customer agrees that it will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the written consent of Boeing, disclose this Letter Agreement or any
information contained here in to any other person or entity, except as may be
required by law or governmental regulations.

If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding or our agreement with respect
to the matters set forth above, please indicate your acceptance and approval
below.  This Letter Agreement will become effective upon signature by
Boeing and Customer.

EXECUTED
on _________________


THE
BOEING COMPANY

By
_____________________

Its____Attorney-In-Fact____

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
_______________________, 2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By
_____________________________

Its
______________________________














P.A. No.
3219
787
Inspection Process
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1043  Page





[Missing Graphic Reference]







Customer
Services during Production






[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























BOEING
PROPRIETARY



P.A. No.
3219
787
Inspection Process
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A ii





BOEING
PROPRIETARY



BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A iii





BOEING
PROPRIETARY



BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 1





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 2





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 3





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 4





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 5





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 6





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 7





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 8





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 9





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 10





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 11





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 12





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 13





BOEING
PROPRIETARY




BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      



















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























Rev
      A 14





BOEING
PROPRIETARY





BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 






EX-10.138W
44
ex10138w.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138w.htm






 



 






 



6-1162-CLO-1042

American
Airlines, Inc.
2000
Eagle Parkway
MD
8250
Fort
Worth, TX 76177

Subject:                      Contribution
Toward Third Party Damages





Reference:


Customer
      Services General Terms Agreement No. 23-1 (CSGTA), Letter Agreement 23-1A
      to the CSGTA and Supplemental Agreement No. SA-eE dated December 21, 2007
      (SA-eE) to the CSGTA between The Boeing Company (Boeing) and American
      Airlines, Inc. (Customer)





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) supersedes Letter Agreement 6-1181-OC-00703
dated December 19, 2007, amends and supplements the CSGTA, Letter Agreement
23-1A to the CSGTA and Supplemental Agreement No. SA-eE.  Capitalized
terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the CSGTA, Letter Agreement 23-1A to the CSGTA and SA-eE.





1.  


Contribution Toward
      Third Party Damages.





Clause
12.4 of Letter Agreement 23-1A to the CSGTA which modifies Customer’s CSGTA is
hereby replaced with the text below solely as applied to the SA-eE:

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”





2.  


Assignment.





This
Letter Agreement is being provided to Customer as an accommodation and cannot be
assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of
Boeing.





3.  


Confidential
      Treatment.





Customer
understands and agrees that certain commercial and/or financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing as
confidential.  Customer agrees that it will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the written consent of Boeing, disclose this Letter Agreement or any
information contained



P.A. No.
3219
Contribution
Toward Third Parties
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1042   Page
2




herein to
any other person or entity, except as may be required by law or governmental
regulations.

If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to the matters set forth above, please indicate your acceptance and approval
below.  This Letter Agreement will become effective upon signature by
Boeing and Customer.

EXECUTED
on __________________


AMERICAN
AIRLINES,
INC.                                                                                           THE
BOEING COMPANY


_________________________                                                                                           __________________________
Signature                                                                                Signature
_________________________                                                                                           __________________________
Printed
Name                                                                                Printed
Name
_________________________                                                                                           __________________________
Title                                                                      Title




P.A. No.
3219
Contribution
Toward Third Parties
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138X
45
ex10138x.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138x.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1045  Page
2



6-1162-CLO-1045


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








(b)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








(c)  


Letter
      Agreement No. 6-1162-TRW-0664 entitled Aircraft Purchase Rights and
      Substitution Rights





This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.




P.A. No.
3219
Treatment
of Aircraft Delivering Beyond the MFC Period
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1045  Page
2




3           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Treatment
of Aircraft Delivering Beyond the MFC Period
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138Y
46
ex10138y.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138y.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1046  Page
2



6-1162-CLO-1046


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      SA-eE,
COTS Software, and End User License Matters





Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)




(b) Supplemental
Agreement No. SA-eE dated December 21, 2007 ( the SA-eE)
(c) Letter
Agreement No. 6-1162-TRW-0668 entitled Special Matters Relating to COTS Software
and End User License Agreements


This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           787
SA-eE.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219
SA-eE
Matters, COTS Software and End User License Matters 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1046  Page
2




2.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.

3.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
SA-eE
Matters, COTS Software and End User License Matters 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138Z
47
ex10138z.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138z.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1047  Page
3



6-1162-CLO-1047


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.






1.  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
1.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

1.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.




P.A. No.
3219
Reduced
Advance Payment Schedule Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1047  Page
3




3.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Reduced
Advance Payment Schedule Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AA
48
ex10138aa.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138aa.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1048  Page
3



6-1162-CLO-1048


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Final
Matters






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)








 
      


(b)


Letter
      Agreement No. 6-1162-CLO-0664 entitled Aircraft Purchase Rights and
      Substitution Rights






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.


1.           Introduction.

The
delivery schedule for the Aircraft is uncertain due to the current labor strike
by the International Association of Machinists (the IAM) and the upcoming labor
negotiations with the Society of Professional Engineering Employees in Aerospace
(SPEEA).  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.           Revised Delivery Schedule
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


3.           Airframe and Engine
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.




P.A. No.
3219
Final
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1048  Page
3




5           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
Final
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AB
49
ex10138ab.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ab.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1049  Page
5



6-1162-CLO-1049


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      CS1
Matters






Reference:


(a)


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923
      aircraft (the Aircraft)





(b)           Supplemental
Exhibit CS1 entitled 787 Product Support Document


This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

This
letter sets forth terms and conditions, which are beyond Boeing’s normal product
support offering as set forth in reference (b).

1.           Part 1, paragraph 5.9
regarding Additional Terms and Conditions.

The
following sentence is hereby added to the end of paragraph 5.9 of Part 1 of
reference (b):

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

2.           Part 2, paragraph 1.1
regarding Field Service Representation.

The
following paragraph replaces and supersedes paragraph 1.1 of Part 2 of reference
(b):

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Part 2, par. 2.1.4 regarding
Engineering Support Services.

The
following paragraph replaces and supersedes paragraph 2.1.4 of Part 2 of
reference (b):

“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”





4.  


Part 3, par. 6
      regarding Revisions.





The
following paragraphs are added after paragraph 6.1 of Part 3 of reference
(b):

“6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
CS1
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1049  Page
5








5.  


Part 3, par. 7
      regarding Supplier Technical
Data.





The
following paragraphs are added following paragraph 7.3 of Part 3 of reference
(b):

“7.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

           7.6           Customer
will be supplied with the following supplier technical data for repairable
equipment:





(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(ii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
      AND FILED SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(iii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
      AND FILED SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(iv)  


 [CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];





(v)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED
      AND FILED SEPARATELY




WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]”











6.           Part 6 regarding
Other.

Part 6
entitled “Other” as set forth below is hereby added to reference
(b).

“787
CUSTOMER SUPPORT DOCUMENT

PART
6:   OTHER


1           Additional Technical Data
and Documents.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”

7.           Assignment.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of
the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations described in this Letter
Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of Customer becoming the
operator of the Aircraft and cannot be assigned, in whole or in part, without
the prior written consent of Boeing.



P.A. No.
3219
CS1
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-CLO-1049  Page
5




8.           Confidential
Treatment.

The information contained herein
represents confidential business information and has value precisely because it
is not available generally or to other parties.  Customer will limit
the disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          




P.A. No.
3219
CS1
Matters Rev.: 04/03/08
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AC
50
ex10138ac.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ac.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0664
Page 




6-1162-TRW-0664


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas/Ft.
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616


Subject:                      Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 between The Boeing Company (Boeing) and American
      Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787-923 aircraft (Purchase
      Agreement)






This letter agreement (“Letter Agreement”) is
entered into on the date below, and constitutes a part of the Purchase
Agreement, as the same may hereafter be amended, modified or supplemented and
including, without limitation, as part thereof the exhibits, appendices,
schedules, attachments and letter agreements thereto.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.           Definitions.                                Capitalized
terms used herein and not defined pursuant to this Letter Agreement have the
meanings set forth in the  Purchase Agreement. The following terms,
when used in capitalized form, have the following meanings:

“Applicable Delivery
Month” means: (a) with respect to each Firm Aircraft, the Scheduled
Delivery Month for such aircraft; (b) with respect to each Rights
Aircraft
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].; (c) with respect to each
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].and specified to Customer pursuant to
Section 4.2
hereof; and (d) with respect to each [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].specified therefor (or such other month in which a Delivery Position
has been reserved for such aircraft in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Section
4.3).

“Applicable Purchase
Agreement” means: (a) when used with respect to any Rights Aircraft or
Substitute Aircraft that is a model 787-923, the  Purchase Agreement;
(b) when used with respect to any Rights Aircraft or Substitute Aircraft that is
a model 787-823 or model 787-323, the purchase agreement executed and delivered
pursuant to Section
8.2 hereof in connection with Customer's first purchase (if any) of such
model, as such purchase agreement may be supplemented, amended or
modified;

           “Available Position”
means any Delivery Position that is available in Boeing's judgment for the
delivery of a Rights Aircraft to Customer in connection with the exercise of a
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Available Introduction
Position” means an Introduction Position that is available in Boeing's
judgment for the delivery of a Rights Aircraft or Substitute Aircraft (as the
case may be) with an interior configuration not previously certified by the
FAA.

“Business Day” means
Monday through Friday, except for federal or state holidays.

“Committed Month”
means the month reserved by Boeing and set forth in Attachment A hereto
for delivery of each [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Delivery Position”
means that portion of the production rate that is or may from time to time be
allocated by Boeing or its Affiliate for the manufacture of a model 787 aircraft
(or any Derivative or Successor) and delivery of such aircraft in a specified
month.

“Derivative” means any
airframe model that is a derivative of the model 787 (other than a model 787-8
or model 787-3) that is developed by Boeing or an Affiliate of Boeing subsequent
to the date hereof.

“Eligible Model” means
all or any combination thereof, as the context requires, of the following listed
airframe model types, in each case manufactured in accordance with the
applicable Detail Specification identified on Attachment C hereto,
as such Detail Specification may be modified from time to time in accordance
with Article 4 of the AGTA or as otherwise mutually agreed to by Boeing and
Customer:

(a)           at
any time, the Boeing model 787-923;





 
      


(b)


in
      the case of the Boeing model 787-823 or 787-323, such model will be an
      Eligible Model:









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(c)


any
      Derivative or Successor Model from and after such time as it is deemed to
      be an Eligible Model in accordance with the provisions of Section 9
      hereof.





“Expiration Date”
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Firm Advance
Payments” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.3
hereof.

“Firm Aircraft” means:
(a) the [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].identified as of the date
hereof on Table 1 to the 787-923 Purchase Agreement; and (b) any aircraft
incorporated after the date hereof in an Applicable Purchase Agreement pursuant
to Section 8
hereof.

“Introduction
Position” means each Delivery Position for an Aircraft with an interior
configuration not previously certified by the FAA that is designated by Boeing
in the ordinary course of business as a customer introduction production
position.

“Launch Program” means
a program initiated by Boeing to design, manufacture and obtain FAA type
certification for a new model type of aircraft (e.g., Model B797), or a new
sub-model type of aircraft (e.g., Model 787-10). A Launch Program may require
that certain conditions be met by customers ordering aircraft subject to the
Launch Program, which may include but not be limited to: (i) minimum number of
customers; (ii) engine availability; (iii) use of customers’ aircraft for
certification and development purposes; (iv) additional restrictions on optional
features available; and (v) restrictions on the availability of Delivery
Positions for aircraft purchased pursuant to the exercise of certain purchase
rights. Such conditions will no longer be applicable upon completion of the
Launch Program.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” as designated in Attachment A hereto,
provided that if any such date is not a Business Day, then such [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].shall be the next succeeding Business
Day.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.1
hereof.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].” has the meaning set forth in Section 2
hereof.

“Modified Exercise
Notice” means a notice delivered by Customer pursuant to Section 4.3(b)
hereof.

“Proposal Deposit”
means, with respect to each Eligible Model, that amount designated in Attachment C hereto
as the “[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]” for such model.

“Purchase Agreement
Supplement” means any supplement to an Applicable Purchase Agreement,
substantially in the form of Attachment D hereto
or otherwise in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to Boeing and
Customer, from time to time executed and delivered pursuant to Section
8.1.

“Purchase Rights”
means, collectively, the [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].granted
pursuant hereto.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” means the “Rights Aircraft Exercise Lead Time Exercise Date” as
designated in Attachment B hereto,
provided that if any such date is not a Business Day, then such [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].shall be the next succeeding Business
Day.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.2
hereof.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 2
hereof.

“Requested Delivery
Month” means such month(s) in which Customer desires delivery of a Rights
Aircraft subject to a[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], as specified by
Customer in a [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..

“Rights Aircraft”
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.3
hereof.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]” has the meaning set forth in Section 2
hereof.

“Substitute Aircraft”
means any aircraft which Customer has designated, pursuant to Section 5.1 hereof,
to be delivered in lieu of a Firm Aircraft.

“Substitution Notice”
has the meaning set forth in Section 5.1
hereof.

“Successor Model”
means [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

“Then Current Engine
Price” means the Engine Price of Rights Aircraft or Substitute Aircraft
set by the Engine Supplier as of the date of execution of a Purchase Agreement
Supplement entered into by Boeing and Customer.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Information.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3           Concurrently
with the disclosure by Boeing or any Affiliate of Boeing to any other customer
or potential customer of plans to study the development of a Derivative or a
Successor Model, Boeing will make available to Customer information, in
reasonable detail, regarding such Derivative or Successor Model, including, but
not limited to, the product development activities and schedule with respect
thereto.

3.4           Boeing
will inform Customer of, and offer Customer the opportunity to participate in,
any airline working group or other forum sponsored by Boeing for the purpose of
soliciting the input of potential customers in connection with the development
of any Derivative or any Successor Model.

3.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



4.           Exercise of Purchase
Rights.

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:









 
      


(i)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





 
      

 



5.           Substitution
Right.

5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



PA No.
3219
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0664
Page 




6.           Aircraft Price and Credit
Memoranda.

6.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

6.3.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.3.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.4.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


7.           Payments.

7.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

7.3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].























8.           Forms of
Agreement.

8.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

8.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:





 
      


(a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT];









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT];









 
      


(c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]









 
      


(d)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].





[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













9.           Derivative
and Successor Models.  If prior to the
Expiration Date Boeing and Customer agree upon terms and conditions (including,
without limitation, any applicable launch program conditions) for the purchase
of a Derivative or Successor Model pursuant to Letter Agreement 6-1162-AKP-072R2
as may be amended from time to time, such Derivative or Successor Model shall be
deemed to be an Eligible Model hereunder, and Customer shall be entitled,
subject to the terms hereof, to exercise any Purchase Right for the purchase of
such Derivative or Successor Model and/or to exercise its right of substitution
to have such Derivative or Successor Model delivered in lieu of any Firm
Aircraft.

10.           Production
Capacity Assurances.  If Customer has
exercised all of the MADP Rights and QADP Rights granted hereby and desires to
purchase a sufficient number of Rights Aircraft that would, in Boeing's
reasonable judgment, economically justify an increase in the production rate for
the model type of aircraft Customer desires to purchase, Boeing shall use its
best reasonable efforts to increase the production rate for such
aircraft.

11.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].  Notwithstanding anything in this Letter
Agreement, Customer’s [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
























12.           Confidential
Treatment.  Customer and
Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information contained in
this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential.
Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the
information contained herein as confidential and will not, without the prior
written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement or any information
contained herein to any other person or entity, except as provided in this
Letter Agreement or in the Applicable Purchase Agreements.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its     Attorney-In-Fact              


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

____ day
of                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                          

Its                                           


Attachment
A:                                Information
regarding MADP Rights
Attachment
B:                                Information
regarding QADP Rights
Attachment
C:                                Description
and Price for Eligible Models
Attachment
D:                                Form
of Purchase Agreement Supplement
Attachment
E:                                Letter
Agreements



PA No.
3219
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
A to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
MADP
Option
Rights
Aircraft Exercise Lead Time Exercise Date












[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




























PA
3219 Page 1 of 1


 



 






 



Attachment
B to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
QADP
Option
Rights
Aircraft Exercise Lead Time Exercise Date












[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




























PA
3219 Page 1 of 1


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-1O.TXT Page
1


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-1O.TXT Page
2


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-1O.TXT Page
3


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-2O.TXT Page
1


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-2O.TXT Page
2


 



 






 



Attachment
C to Letter Agreement 6-1162-0664
Rights
Aircraft Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments













[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



























AAL
48980-2O.TXT Page
3


 



 






 


Attachment
D to
6-1162-TRW-0664




PURCHASE
AGREEMENT SUPPLEMENT NO. [___]

PURCHASE AGREEMENT SUPPLEMENT NO. 3219,
dated [__________, ____], between The Boeing Company (“Boeing”) and American
Airlines, Inc. (“Customer”).

R E C I T A L S:

A.           Boeing
and Customer have heretofore entered into (i) that certain Purchase Agreement
No. 3219, dated [__________], 2007 (capitalized terms used herein without
definition shall have the meanings specified therefor in such Purchase
Agreement), and (ii) that certain Letter Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0664 (the “Rights
Letter”), providing for the execution and delivery from time to time of Purchase
Agreement Supplements, each substantially in the form hereof, for the purpose of
subjecting Rights Aircraft and Substitute Aircraft to the Purchase Agreement as
and when purchased by Customer in accordance with the terms of the Rights
Letter.

B.           Customer
has exercised its right under the Rights Letter to purchase the aircraft
described below pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Purchase Agreement
as supplemented by this Purchase Agreement Supplement.

In consideration of the foregoing
premises and other good and sufficient consideration, Boeing and Customer hereby
agree as follows:

1.           Aircraft
Description.  Boeing will
manufacture and sell to Customer, and Customer will purchase, the aircraft
described in Table 1-[__] attached hereto and made a part hereof.

2.           Delivery
Schedule.  The Scheduled
Delivery Month of each aircraft is set forth in Table 1-[__].

3.           Price.  The Aircraft
Basic Price and each component thereof and the Advance Payment Base Price for
the aircraft are set forth in Table 1-[__].

4.           Payment.

4.1           Boeing
acknowledges receipt of a Deposit in the amount of [$_________] for each
aircraft.

4.2           Customer
will make advance payments to Boeing in the amount of [____%] of the Advance
Payment Base Price of each aircraft, beginning with a payment of [__%], less the
Deposit, on the date of this Purchase Agreement Supplement for each
aircraft.  Additional payments for each aircraft are due on the first
Business Day of the months and in the amounts listed in Table
1-[__].

4.3           For
any aircraft described on Table 1-[___] having a Scheduled Delivery Month less
than twenty-four (24) months from the date of this Purchase Agreement
Supplement, the total amount of advance payments due upon the date of this
Purchase Agreement Supplement will include all advance payments that are or were
due on or before such date in accordance with the advance payment schedule set
forth in Table 1-[___].

5.           Purchase
Agreement.  All of the terms
and provisions of the Purchase Agreement are hereby incorporated by reference in
this Purchase Agreement Supplement to the same extent as if fully set forth
herein; and each reference therein to “Aircraft” shall be deemed to include the
aircraft described in Table 1-[__] attached hereto.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Boeing and Customer
have each caused this Purchase Agreement Supplement No. [____] to be duly
executed as of the day and year first above written.


THE
BOEING COMPANY


By:_____________________________

Name:__________________________

Title:___________________________                                                                                                                     


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By:_____________________________

Name:__________________________


Title:___________________________                                                                                                                     




PA No.
3219                                                                                                                                
Page 
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


Attachment
E to
6-1162-TRW-0664







The following letter agreements, as may
be amended from time to time, between Boeing and Customer will be expressly
incorporated by reference in any purchase agreement executed and delivered by
the parties pursuant to Section 8.2 of this
Letter Agreement:

Letter Agreement
No.                                                      Subject





6-1162-TRW-0670


Miscellaneous
      Commitments for Model 787





6-1162-AKP-071R1                                                      Purchase
Obligations





6-1162-AKP-072R2


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





6-1162-AKP-073R1                                                      Accident
Claims and Litigation

6-1162-TRW-0674                                                      Business
Considerations





 
      


3219-05


Spares
      Commitments









6-1162-TRW-0673


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


























PA No.
3219
Aircraft
Purchase Rights and Substitution Rights
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AD
51
ex10138ad.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ad.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0665
Page
2



6-1162-TRW-0665


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (the
Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

Customer
has requested and Boeing has agreed that [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], and Boeing and Customer
shall execute a Supplemental Agreement to the Purchase Agreement conforming
Table 1, Supplemental Exhibit EE1 and the Performance Guarantees to Customer’s
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




P.A. No.
3219 80227
Alternate_Engine_Selection Rev.:
01/08/04
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0665
Page
2



Confidential
Treatment.                                                      Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement or in the applicable Purchase
Agreement.




Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          






P.A. No.
3219
Alternate_Engine_Selection Rev.:
01/08/04
BOEING
PROPRIETARY 


 



 






 






EX-10.138AE
52
ex10138ae.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ae.htm






 



 






 


Boeing Commercial Airplanes

P.O. Box 3707 
Seattle , WA 98124-2207 

[Missing Graphic Reference] 





6-1166-TRW-0666

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616
 
Subject:                      TRENT1000-J
Powered 787-9 Performance Retention Commitment
 




Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase
      Agreement) between The Boeing Company (Boeing)
      and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer)
      relating to Model 787-923 Aircraft (Aircraft).




 
This
Letter Agreement (Letter
Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement.  All
terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the Purchase Agreement.
 
Boeing
recognizes that performance retention within reasonable limits is essential to
maintain the economy of operation of the Aircraft.  Therefore the
parties hereto agree as follows with respect to performance
retention.
 




1.  


Aircraft
      Commitment.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Covered Aircraft shall be defined as a
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..
 
Boeing
commits to Customer that, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], as
defined in Attachment A, during the Performance Retention Term, as defined in
paragraph 2 below, will not exceed the levels shown in the table below (Aircraft
Commitment).
 




Time
      After Delivery of the First Covered Aircraft


Cumulative
      Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration Commitment (%)



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      



 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 




2.  


Applicability and
      Performance Retention Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




2.1  


Delivery Schedule for
      Covered Aircraft.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, it is anticipated that Boeing will deliver
the Covered Aircraft to Customer in accordance with the delivery schedule set
forth in Attachment C.  If the fleet size and delivery schedule is
significantly different, the Aircraft Commitment may be appropriately adjusted
to reflect such changes.
 
 




2.2  


Performance Retention
      Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




3.  


Conditions.




 




3.1  


Operation and
      Maintenance.




 
Customer shall operate and maintain
the Covered Aircraft in accordance with Customer’s FAA-approved operations and
maintenance programs.  Customer shall operate and maintain the engines
in accordance with the Operation and Maintenance Manuals and Customer's
Maintenance Program and an Engine Management Program mutually defined and agreed
to by the Engine Manufacturer and Customer.
 




3.2  


Powerback.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.3                  Flight Cycle Utilization and
Derate.


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
In the
event Customer employs a Covered Aircraft during the Performance Retention Term
of this Letter Agreement within the Customer’s system such that the operation is
greater than the maximum assumed values or lower than the minimum assumed values
then the parties agree to make adjustments to the Basic Data, defined in
Paragraph 4 below, solely with respect to such Covered Aircraft, as a
consequence of such usage.
 




4.  


Determination of Fuel
      Mileage Deterioration.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
Following
the delivery of each Covered Aircraft to Customer by Boeing, and continuing
until expiration of the Performance Retention Term, Customer shall record,
analyze, and forward to Boeing cruise fuel mileage data obtained on such Covered
Aircraft as specified in Attachment B (Basic
Data)

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




5.  


Notice of Performance
      Deterioration.




[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].





6.  


Election of
      Actions.




 
Upon
Boeing's receipt of any notice that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration exceeds, or is likely to exceed the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing
and Customer, as appropriate, will take the following actions:
 
[Missing
Graphic
Reference]                                6.1           Data.
 
Boeing
will evaluate the Basic Data.  At its option, Boeing may accomplish
such evaluation by analysis of Customer’s raw ACMS data or by obtaining
additional performance data on such Covered Aircraft in accordance with
Attachment B.  Such additional data may include data acquired during
revenue service with Boeing personnel aboard as observers.  The Basic
Data and any additional data obtained by Boeing in its evaluation shall be
appropriately adjusted to reflect any material changes elected by Customer to
the Covered Aircraft which have occurred subsequent to delivery of the Covered
Aircraft, including any replacement of one or more of the engines installed on a
Covered Aircraft.  Additionally, adjustments will be applied for any
relevant factors as agreed by Customer and Boeing (e.g., inaccuracies in flight
deck instrumentation, a sudden increase in deterioration that is attributed to a
foreign object damage event such as severe hail and the additional rate of
deterioration for Aircraft used for pilot training.)  If Boeing and
Customer are in disagreement as to such evaluation of the Basic Data, such
disagreement shall be resolved by good faith technical negotiation between the
parties including, as necessary, the Engine Manufacturer.
 

 

 
6.2                  Surveys.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
6.3                  Weight.
 
Boeing
may request that Customer weigh such Covered Aircraft, in which event Customer
agrees to weigh such Covered Aircraft in conjunction with its normally scheduled
maintenance and will report its findings to Boeing.
 




6.4  


Corrective
      Actions.




 
Boeing shall promptly make such
recommendations to Customer that Boeing believes would result in improvement of
the cruise fuel mileage performance of such Covered Aircraft based on analysis
of the surveys and available data pursuant to Paragraphs 6.1 -
6.3.  Boeing, Engine Manufacturer and Customer shall thereafter
mutually agree on the appropriate corrective action to be taken based on any
such recommendations.  Corrective actions, which involve maintenance
and/or refurbishment, as described in paragraph 6.2, both on-wing and off-wing,
shall be performed at no cost to Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer.
 
6.5                  Improvement Parts and Engine
Refurbishment.
 
 
Following
the completion of any corrective action pursuant to Paragraph 6.4, if subsequent
Basic Data show that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration of
the Covered Aircraft exceeds the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing shall have the
option to provide or cause to be provided to Customer, at no charge, (except
life used on engine parts or parts utilized for maintenance) any airplane drag
improvement parts and/or engine TSFC improvement parts (Improvement
Parts) which, when installed in such Covered Aircraft or engines, would
result in an improvement in the cruise fuel mileage
performance.  Boeing shall provide and/or shall cause Engine
Manufacturer to provide, as appropriate, reimbursement for Customer’s
incorporation of such improvements, corrections, or changes at the warranty
labor rate then in effect between Boeing and Customer or Engine Manufacturer and
Customer, as applicable.  Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer shall give
Customer reasonable advance written notice of the estimated on-dock date at
Customer’s maintenance base for any such Improvement Parts.
 
If Boeing
elects to provide or causes to be provided Improvement Parts for such Covered
Aircraft or engines, then Customer and Boeing shall mutually agree upon the
details of such an Improvement Parts program.  To the extent Boeing
and/or Engine Manufacturer are required to support such a program, such support
shall be provided at no charge to Customer.
 

 

 

 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
If
Customer elects to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft and/or
engines, they shall be incorporated in a timely manner and in accordance with
Boeing and Engine Manufacturer instructions.
 
If
Customer elects not to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft
and/or engines, or if Customer elects not to refurbish an engine which has
exceeded Twenty Four Thousand and Six (24,006) hours since new or Nineteen
Thousand Nine Hundred Eighty Four (19,984) hours since initial or any
subsequent performance refurbishment, and for which Boeing and/or Engine
Manufacturer has recommended refurbishment as part of its recommended corrective
actions, subsequent Basic Data shall be appropriately adjusted by an amount
consistent with the improvement in cruise fuel mileage performance which would
have been realized had such Improvement Parts been incorporated or had such
engine refurbishment been performed; provided, however, any such improvement in
cruise fuel mileage performance shall be reasonably substantiated by Boeing to
Customer.
 




7.  


Payments.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 
7.1                  Annual Excess Fuel Burn
Amount.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].
















8.  


Duplication of
      Benefits




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




9.  


Assignment
      Prohibited.




 
Notwithstanding
any other provisions of the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations
described in this Letter Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of
Customer’s becoming the operator of the Aircraft, and cannot be assigned, in
whole or in part, without the prior written consent of Boeing.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




10.  


Exclusive
      Remedy.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




11.  


Confidential
      Treatment.




 
Customer
understands and agrees that the information contained herein represents
confidential business information and has value precisely because it is not
available generally or to other parties.  Customer agrees to limit the
disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.
 
Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          
 

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to the matters treated above, please indicate your acceptance and
approval.

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this              
day of _____ of 2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By:                                          
 
Its:                                                                         
 
By:                                                                                                      
 
Its:                                                                             



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
A to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page   




 
Determination of Cumulative
Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration
 
For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the “Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration” is the average cruise fuel mileage deterioration of the Covered
Aircraft.  The determination of the Fleet Average Mileage
Deterioration will be based on fuel mileage deterioration of individual Covered
Aircraft relative to their Baseline Performance Level cruise fuel mileage
performance as defined below.
 
1.           Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Program
(APM),
in effect at the time of delivery of the first Covered Aircraft, that shall be
used for data analysis during the Performance Retention Term.  For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Model Reference Level cruise fuel mileage
performance for the Covered Aircraft shall be as set forth in the
APM.
 
2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
4.           The
“Current Deterioration” (expressed as a percentage) for each Covered Aircraft is
the difference between the Current Performance Level and the Baseline
Performance Level.
 
5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
6.           The
“Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration” (expressed as a
percentage) will be determined for each Subsequent Monitoring Period by summing
the Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration values as determined in Paragraph 5
for each calendar month according to the following equation:
 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




 
 




 
      


SEPARATELY
      WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO




 
 




 
      


REQUEST
      FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
 
7.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
B to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page   1




 
Cruise Fuel Mileage
Performance Determination
 
Customer
shall obtain cruise fuel mileage performance data in revenue service using the
Airplane Condition Monitoring System (ACMS).  This data will be
recorded during level flight cruise in steady state conditions.  Data
shall be obtained in accordance with the then current revision of the Airplane
Performance Monitoring Software User Guide (APM User Guide) and shall include
the parameters defined in the airplane model specific appendix during each such
data recording (Data Events).
 
Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Software
for data analysis.  Customer shall reduce and analyze data obtained
from the Data Events.  Such analysis shall be in accordance with the
methods set forth in the APM User Guide.  Customer’s analysis shall
include the determination of the fuel mileage, thrust required and fuel flow
required relative to the Model Reference Level.
 
Customer
will maintain records of factors relating to fuel mileage
deterioration.  These factors will include (a) engine history, cockpit
instrumentation history and airframe history and condition of such Covered
Aircraft, (b) pertinent Covered Aircraft maintenance and operational procedures
used by Customer, (c) drag effects of any post delivery airframe and/or engine
changes incorporated in such Covered Aircraft, (d) sudden shifts in engine EGT
condition monitoring data, and (e) any other relevant factors.
 




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
C to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page    




 
Delivery Schedule for
Covered Aircraft
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      






P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
D to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0666
Page    



ANNUAL LIMITATION ADJUSTMENT
EQUATION

 
([CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].)





 (a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].










(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 (c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:










(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].






























 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(iii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









NOTE:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AF
53
ex10138af.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138af.htm






 



 






 


Boeing Commercial Airplanes

P.O. Box 3707 
Seattle , WA 98124-2207 

[Missing Graphic Reference] 







6-1162-TRW-0667

American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616
 




Subject:


GENX-1B74/75
      Powered 787-9 Performance Retention
Commitment




 




Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase
      Agreement) between The Boeing Company (Boeing)
      and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer)
      relating to Model 787-923 Aircraft (Aircraft).




 
This
Letter Agreement (Letter
Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement.  All
terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the Purchase Agreement.
 
Boeing
recognizes that performance retention within reasonable limits is essential to
maintain the economy of operation of the Aircraft.  Therefore the
parties hereto agree as follows with respect to performance
retention.
 




1.  


Aircraft
      Commitment.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Covered Aircraft shall be defined as a
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
Boeing
commits to Customer that, [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT], as
defined in Attachment A, during the Performance Retention Term, as defined in
paragraph 2 below, will not exceed the levels shown in the table below (Aircraft
Commitment).
 




Time
      After Delivery of the First Covered Aircraft


Cumulative
      Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration Commitment (%)



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      



 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 




2.  


Applicability and
      Performance Retention Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




2.1  


Delivery Schedule for
      Covered Aircraft.




 
For the
purposes of this Letter Agreement, it is anticipated that Boeing will deliver
the Covered Aircraft to Customer in accordance with the following delivery
schedule set forth in Attachment C.  If the fleet size and delivery
schedule is significantly different, the Aircraft Commitment may be
appropriately adjusted to reflect such changes.
 
 




2.2  


Performance Retention
      Term.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




3.  


Conditions.




 




3.1  


Operation and
      Maintenance.




 
Customer shall operate and maintain
the Covered Aircraft in accordance with Customer’s FAA-approved operations and
maintenance programs.  Customer shall operate and maintain the engines
in accordance with the Operation and Maintenance Manuals and Customer's
Maintenance Program and an Engine Management Program mutually defined and agreed
to by the Engine Manufacturer and Customer.
 




3.2  


Powerback.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.3                  Flight Cycle Utilization and
Derate.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 




4.  


Determination of Fuel
      Mileage Deterioration.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
Following
the delivery of each Covered Aircraft to Customer by Boeing, and continuing
until expiration of the Performance Retention Term, Customer shall record,
analyze, and forward to Boeing cruise fuel mileage data obtained on such Covered
Aircraft as specified in Attachment B (Basic
Data).

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




5.  


Notice of Performance
      Deterioration.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




6.  


Election of
      Actions.




 
Upon
Boeing's receipt of any notice that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration exceeds, or is likely to exceed the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing
and Customer, as appropriate, will take the following actions:
 
[Missing
Graphic
Reference]                                6.1           Data.
 
Boeing
will evaluate the Basic Data.  At its option, Boeing may accomplish
such evaluation by analysis of Customer’s raw ACMS data or by obtaining
additional performance data on such Covered Aircraft in accordance with
Attachment B.  Such additional data may include data acquired during
revenue service with Boeing personnel aboard as observers.  The Basic
Data and any additional data obtained by Boeing in its evaluation shall be
appropriately adjusted to reflect any material changes elected by Customer to
the Covered Aircraft which have occurred subsequent to delivery of the Covered
Aircraft, including any replacement of one or more of the engines installed on a
Covered Aircraft.  Additionally, adjustments will be applied for any
relevant factors as agreed by Customer and Boeing (e.g., inaccuracies in flight
deck instrumentation, a sudden increase in deterioration that is attributed to a
foreign object damage event such as severe hail and the additional rate of
deterioration for Aircraft used for pilot training.)  If Boeing and
Customer are in disagreement as to such evaluation of the Basic Data, such
disagreement shall be resolved by good faith technical negotiation between the
parties including, as necessary, the Engine Manufacturer.
 

 

 

 
6.2                  Surveys.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
6.3                  Weight.
 
Boeing
may request that Customer weigh such Covered Aircraft, in which event Customer
agrees to weigh such Covered Aircraft in conjunction with its normally scheduled
maintenance and will report its findings to Boeing.
 




6.4  


Corrective
      Actions.




 
Boeing shall promptly make such
recommendations to Customer that Boeing believes would result in improvement of
the cruise fuel mileage performance of such Covered Aircraft based on analysis
of the surveys and available data pursuant to Paragraphs 6.1 -
6.3.  Boeing, Engine Manufacturer and Customer shall thereafter
mutually agree on the appropriate corrective action to be taken based on any
such recommendations.  Corrective actions, which involve maintenance
and/or refurbishment, as described in paragraph 6.2, both on-wing and off-wing,
shall be performed at no cost to Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer.
 
6.5                  Improvement Parts and Engine
Refurbishment.
 
 
Following
the completion of any corrective action pursuant to Paragraph 6.4, if subsequent
Basic Data show that the Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration of
the Covered Aircraft exceeds the Aircraft Commitment, Boeing shall have the
option to provide or cause to be provided to Customer, at no charge, (except
life used on engine parts or parts utilized for maintenance) any airplane drag
improvement parts and/or engine TSFC improvement parts (Improvement
Parts) which, when installed in such Covered Aircraft or engines, would
result in an improvement in the cruise fuel mileage
performance.  Boeing shall provide and/or shall cause Engine
Manufacturer to provide, as appropriate, reimbursement for Customer’s
incorporation of such improvements, corrections, or changes at the warranty
labor rate then in effect between Boeing and Customer or Engine Manufacturer and
Customer, as applicable.  Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer shall give
Customer reasonable advance written notice of the estimated on-dock date at
Customer’s maintenance base for any such Improvement Parts.
 
If Boeing
elects to provide or causes to be provided Improvement Parts for such Covered
Aircraft or engines, then Customer and Boeing shall mutually agree upon the
details of such an Improvement Parts program.  To the extent Boeing
and/or Engine Manufacturer are required to support such a program, such support
shall be provided at no charge to Customer.
 

 

 

 
If
Customer elects to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft and/or
engines, they shall be incorporated in a timely manner and in accordance with
Boeing and Engine Manufacturer instructions.
 
If
Customer elects not to incorporate Improvement Parts in such Covered Aircraft
and/or engines, or if Customer elects not to refurbish an engine which has
exceeded Four Thousand Five Hundred Fifteen (4,515) cycles since new or for more
than Three Thousand Three Hundred Ten (3,110) cycles since performance
refurbishment, and for which Boeing and/or Engine Manufacturer has recommended
refurbishment as part of its recommended corrective actions, subsequent Basic
Data shall be appropriately adjusted by an amount consistent with the
improvement in cruise fuel mileage performance which would have been realized
had such Improvement Parts been incorporated or had such engine refurbishment
been performed; provided, however, any such improvement in cruise fuel mileage
performance shall be reasonably substantiated by Boeing to
Customer.
 




7.  


Payments.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
7.1                  Annual Excess Fuel Burn
Amount.
 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
7.2                  Credit
Memorandum.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
7.3.                  Credit
Adjustments.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
7.4                  Limitation on Amount of
Credits.
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




8.  


Duplication of
      Benefits




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




9.  


Assignment
      Prohibited.




 
Notwithstanding
any other provisions of the Purchase Agreement, the rights and obligations
described in this Letter Agreement are provided to Customer in consideration of
Customer’s becoming the operator of the Aircraft, and cannot be assigned, in
whole or in part, without the prior written consent of Boeing.
 




10.  


Exclusive
      Remedy.




 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




11.  


Confidential
      Treatment.




 
Customer
understands and agrees that the information contained herein represents
confidential business information and has value precisely because it is not
available generally or to other parties.  Customer agrees to limit the
disclosure of its contents to employees of Customer with a need to know the
contents for purposes of helping Customer perform its obligations under the
Purchase Agreement and who understand they are not to disclose its contents to
any other person or entity without the prior written consent of
Boeing.
 
Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          
 


Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


If the
foregoing correctly sets forth your understanding of our agreement with respect
to the matters treated above, please indicate your acceptance and
approval.


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this              
day of _____ of 2008


AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.
 
By:                                                                                                      

Its:                                                                         

By:                                                                                                      
 
Its:                                                                             



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
A to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page   




 
Determination of Cumulative
Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration
 
For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the “Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage
Deterioration” is the average cruise fuel mileage deterioration of the Covered
Aircraft.  The determination of the Fleet Average Mileage
Deterioration will be based on fuel mileage deterioration of individual Covered
Aircraft relative to their Baseline Performance Level cruise fuel mileage
performance as defined below.
 
1.           Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Program
(APM),
in effect at the time of delivery of the first Covered Aircraft, that shall be
used for data analysis during the Performance Retention Term .  For
purposes of this Letter Agreement, the Model Reference Level cruise fuel mileage
performance for the Covered Aircraft shall be as set forth in the
APM.
 
2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 
3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..
 
4.           The
“Current Deterioration” (expressed as a percentage) for each Covered Aircraft is
the difference between the Current Performance Level and the Baseline
Performance Level.
 
5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
6.           The
“Cumulative Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration” (expressed as a
percentage) will be determined for each Subsequent Monitoring Period by summing
the Fleet Average Fuel Mileage Deterioration values as determined in Paragraph 5
for each calendar month according to the following equation:
 
                        m
 




 
      


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILE




 
 




 
      


SEPARATELY
      WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A




 
 




 
      


REQUEST
      FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].




 
 

 
 
7.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
 




P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
B to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page   1




 
Cruise Fuel Mileage
Performance Determination
 
Customer
shall obtain cruise fuel mileage performance data in revenue service using the
Airplane Condition Monitoring System (ACMS).  This data will be
recorded during level flight cruise in steady state conditions.  Data
shall be obtained in accordance with the then current revision of the Airplane
Performance Monitoring Software User Guide (APM User Guide) and shall include
the parameters defined in the airplane model specific appendix during each such
data recording (Data Events).
 
Boeing
will provide Customer with the Boeing Airplane Performance Monitoring Software
for data analysis.  Customer shall reduce and analyze data obtained
from the Data Events.  Such analysis shall be in accordance with the
methods set forth in the APM User Guide.  Customer’s analysis shall
include the determination of the fuel mileage, thrust required and fuel flow
required relative to the Model Reference Level.
 
Customer
will maintain records of factors relating to fuel mileage
deterioration.  These factors will include (a) engine history, cockpit
instrumentation history and airframe history and condition of such Covered
Aircraft, (b) pertinent Covered Aircraft maintenance and operational procedures
used by Customer, (c) drag effects of any post delivery airframe and/or engine
changes incorporated in such Covered Aircraft, (d) sudden shifts in engine EGT
condition monitoring data, and (e) any other relevant factors.



P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
C to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page           





 
Delivery Schedule for
Covered Aircraft
 
[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      


 
      
 
      






P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 



Attachment
D to
Letter
Agreement 6-1162-TRW-0667
Page    



ANNUAL LIMITATION ADJUSTMENT
EQUATION

 
(CALENDAR
YEARS 2012 AND ON)





 (a)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].










(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 (c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].:










(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].































 
      


(ii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









 
      


(iii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].









NOTE:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








P.A. No.
3219
Performance
Retention Commitment
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AG
54
ex10138ag.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ag.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
 
6-1162-TRW-0668   Page
2
 



6-1162-TRW-0668


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


Special
      Matters Relating to COTS Software and End User License
      Agreements









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft
(Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

Recitals

A.  Certain
third party, commercial off-the-shelf software products are available to perform
various functions required in the Aircraft (COTS Software).

B.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..

C.  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

D.  Therefore,
the parties desire to amend certain provisions of the Purchase Agreement to
properly reflect the respective rights and obligations of the parties with
respect to the COTS Software included in the Aircraft.



P.A. No.
3219
EULA_Special_Matters
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
 
6-1162-TRW-0668   Page
2
 




Agreement

1.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3. Customer
may not transfer, novate or assign its rights under this Letter Agreement or any
rights, terms or obligations hereunder, whether by operation of law, contract or
otherwise, except with the express written consent of Boeing, and such consent
will not be unreasonably withheld.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          

Its                                          





P.A. No.
3219
EULA_Special_Matters
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138H
55
ex10138ah.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ah.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0670
Page




6-1162-TRW-0670


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas  75261-9616


Subject:                      Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to Model 787
      aircraft (the Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below, and
amends and supplements the Purchase Agreement. All capitalized terms used herein
but not otherwise defined in this Letter Agreement have the same meaning as in
the Purchase Agreement.

For ease
of reference, a “Table of Contents” has been added as Attachment A to this
Letter Agreement.

1.                AGTA.

1.1           Taxes.

Section 2.2 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:

“2.2           Taxes.

2.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









2.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]..

2.2.4             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


2.2.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.2.6                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.2           Customs
Duties.

1.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


























1.2.2                      Boeing
provides the information in the preceding Section 1.2.1 to Customer as a
courtesy, and not in lieu of professional opinions rendered by counsel of
Customer’s choice, subject to the limitations that Boeing assumes no
responsibility for the accuracy or timeliness of such information, and that
Customer agrees it will assert no claim against Boeing based on such
information.

1.3           Rate of
Interest.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.4           Advanced Payment
Increases.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.5           FAA Manufacturer
Changes.

Section 3.2.2 of the AGTA is replaced
in full by the following new provision:
“3.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”



















1.6           FAA Operator
Changes.

Section 3.3.2 of the AGTA is replaced
in full by the following new Section 3.3.2:
“3.3.2                      Cost of Operator
Changes.

3.3.2.1                    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3.2.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

























(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.3.2.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].,

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”





1.7


Development Change and
      Manufacturer Change Production Revision
  Records.





[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].














1.8           Part 121 Compliance
Review.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.9           Condition of Aircraft
Suffering Damage.

The AGTA is amended by adding the
following new Section 5.6 after Section 5.5 of the AGTA.

“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”
.”

1.10           Target Delivery
Dates.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.11           Customer Delay in Acceptance
of Aircraft.

Section 6.4 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:
           “[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.12           Customer Delay Due to Allied
Pilots Association Strike.

The following new Section 6.5 is added
to the AGTA after Section 6.4:

“6.5           Customer Delay Due to Allied
Pilots Association Strike.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

6.5.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

6.5.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

6.5.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

1.13           Liquidated Damages and Right
of Termination.

1.13.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].














[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].









































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.13.3                 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.13.4                 [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.14           Notice to Customer in the
Event of an Excusable Delay.

Section 7.2 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:
“[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”


1.15           Aircraft Damaged Beyond
Repair.





















Section
7.5 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“7.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

1.16           Termination.

Section 7.6 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

1.17           Excusable
Delay.

The AGTA is amended by adding the
following provision immediately following Section 7.7:


















“7.8                  Section
7.5 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“7.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

1.18           Risk
Allocation/Insurance.

1.18.1                      Article
8 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provisions:

“Article
8.                                Risk
Allocation/Insurance.

8.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


8.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


8.1.2             Boeing
Insurance.

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
.

8.1.3             Definition of
Customer.  For the purpose of Section 8.1, the term “Customer”
includes American Airlines, Inc., its divisions, any wholly-owned subsidiary of
American Airlines, Inc. which is assigned any rights or delegated any duties as
permitted under the applicable Purchase Agreement, the permitted assignees under
the applicable Purchase Agreement, and their respective directors, officers and
employees.

8.2                  Title and Risk with
Customer.

8.2.1             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


8.2.2             [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND
FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]





















 


8.2.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



8.2.4                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


8.2.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

 
8.2.6             Definition of
Boeing.  For purposes of this Article 8.2, the term “Boeing”
includes The Boeing Company, its divisions, any wholly-owned subsidiary of The
Boeing Company which is assigned any rights or obligations in accordance with
Section 9.1 of the AGTA, the permitted assignees under the applicable Purchase
Agreement, provided that such assignees or subsidiaries have performed services
under the Customer Support Document to the AGTA and Supplemental Exhibit CS1 to
the Purchase Agreement, and their respective directors, officers and
employees.”



















1.18.2                      The
insurance certificate provided by Boeing pursuant to Section 8.1.2(c) of the
AGTA (as amended by this Letter Agreement) shall be substantially in the form of
the certificate attached to this Letter Agreement as Attachment B.



1.19           Alteon Interface
Commitment.

1.19.1                  Section
9.1.5 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new
provisions:

“9.1.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

9.1.5.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


9.1.5.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





















1.20           Exculpatory Clause in
Post-Delivery Sale or Lease.

Section 9.7 of the AGTA is replaced in
full by the following new provision:

“9.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
”

1.21           Termination for Certain
Events.

1.21.1                      Article
10 of the AGTA is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“Article
10.                                Termination for Certain
Events.

10.1           Termination.  If
either party:

(i)  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(ii)  [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION
OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

















10.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.22           FAA
Grounding.

1.22.1                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



1.22.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


1.23           FAA ETOPS
Prevention.

































[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


1.24           Duplicate
Remedies.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]



2.           Line Station Spare Parts
Support.

Customer, at its option, may
participate in the use of spare parts held by Boeing at any line station in
accordance with the reasonable terms and conditions set forth by Boeing for such
participation.



























3.           Product Assurance (Exhibit
C).

3.1           Disclaimer and Release;
Exclusion of Liabilities.

Section 11 of Part 2 of the Product
Assurance Document is replaced in full by the following new
provision:

“11.           Disclaimer and Release;
Exclusion of Liabilities.

11.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






 
      


(A)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]










 
      


(B)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]










 
      


(C)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




















(D)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


11.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
.

11.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


11.4           Definitions.  For
the purpose of this Section 11, “BOEING” or “Boeing” is defined as The Boeing
Company, its divisions, subsidiaries, Affiliates, the assignees of each, and
their respective directors, officers, employees and agents.”

3.2           Reimbursement for Service
Bulletin Corrections.

Section 7.3.2 of Part 2 of the Product
Assurance Document is replaced in full by the following provision:

“7.3.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





(a)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND




FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]






(b)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND




FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]








3.3           FAR 145
Requirements.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


3.4           Warranty Claim, Response and
Payment Time.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


3.5           Maximum
Reimbursement.

The following provision is added to the
end of Section 4.5 of Part 2 to the Product Assurance Document:



























“[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

3.6           Additional Service Life
Policy Covered Components.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

3.6.1                  Additional Service Life
Policy Covered Components.

3.6.1.1                      For
purposes of Part 3 of the Product Assurance Document, the following additional
items (Additional SLP Components) shall be deemed to be “SLP Components”, as
defined in Section 1 of Part 3 of the Product Assurance Document:

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

3.6.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:



[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]














3.6.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

 

3.6.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]
.

3.6.2.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]








(i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


























(ii)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]







 
      


(iii)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






3.7           Conditions and Limitations
to the Service Life Policy.

3.7.1                      The
following Section 4.5 is added to Part 3 of the Product Assurance
Document:

“4.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].”

3.7.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





3.8


Boeing Back-Up of
      Supplier Turnaround Time
Commitments.

















[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


3.9           Supplier Warranty
Commitment.

Section 1 of Part 4 of the Product
Assurance Document is replaced in full by the following new Section
1:

“1.           Supplier Warranties and
Supplier Patent Indemnities.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].”

3.10           Engine/Airframe Interface
Commitment.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].
























[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

(b)                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(c)                  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




 
      


.





3.11           Boeing Indemnities Against
Patent and Copyright Infringement.

Part 6 of the Product Assurance
Document is replaced in full by the following new provision:

“PRODUCT
ASSURANCE DOCUMENT

PART
6:                      BOEING
INDEMNITIES AGAINST PATENT AND COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT AND TRADE SECRET
MISAPPROPRIATION

1.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:







(a)           
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

2.           Indemnity Against Copyright
Infringement.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]
:

(a)           
[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Indemnity Against Trade
Secret Misappropriation.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT],


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.           Exceptions, Limitations and
Conditions.

4.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


4.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].













4.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


4.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


4.8           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].



























4.9           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.10           For
the purposes of this Part 6, “BOEING” or “Boeing” is defined as The Boeing
Company, its divisions, wholly owned subsidiaries, the permitted assignees of
each, and their respective directors, officers, employees and
agents.

4.11           
For the purposes of this Part 6, “Customer” is defined as American Airlines,
Inc., its divisions, wholly owned subsidiaries, the permitted assignees of each,
and their respective directors, officers, employees and agents.”




4.           Performance.

4.1           Performance Guarantees/Data
Base Changes.

4.1.1                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





















4.1.2                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]






















(d)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.4                      Upon
the occurrence of any performance data base change, Boeing agrees to take the
following action:

(a)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(b)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(c)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

(d)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].






















(e)           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.5                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.1.6                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]




























[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].
























5.4           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.5           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.6           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.7           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

6.           Assignment.

This
Letter Agreement is being provided to Customer as an accommodation and cannot be
assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of
Boeing.
























7.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement or the applicable Purchase
Agreement.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            

ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                                              

Its                                                              

Attachment
A - Table of Contents
Attachment
B - Form of Insurance Certificate of Boeing



P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 


Attachment
A to
6-1162-TRW-670
Page  





Table
of Contents

Subject                                                                               Paragraph
 

 
1.      AGTA
 
Taxes
(Art.
2)                                                                                           1.1
 
Customs
Duties (Art.
2)                                                                                                     1.2
 
Rate of
Interest (Art.
2)                                                                                           1.3
 
Advanced
Payment Increases (Art.
2)                                                                                                                1.4
 
FAA
Manufacturer Changes (Art.
3)                                                                                                                1.5
 
FAA
Operator Changes (Art.
3)                                                                                                     1.6
 
Development
Change and Manufacturer Change Production
 
Revision
Records (Art.
4)                                                                                                     1.7
 
Part 121
Compliance Review (Art.
4)                                                                                                                1.8
 
Condition
of Aircraft Suffering Damage (Art. 5)1.9
 
Target
Delivery Dates (Art.
6)                                                                                                     1.10
 
Customer
Delay in Acceptance of Aircraft (Art.
6)                                                                                                                1.11
 
Customer
Delay Due to Allied Pilots Association Strike (Art. 6)1.12
 
Liquidated
Damages and Right of Termination (Art. 7)1.13
 
Notice to
Customer in the Event of an Excusable Delay (Art. 7)1.14
 
Aircraft
Damaged Beyond Repair (Art.
7)                                                                                                                1.15
 
Termination
(Art.
7)                                                                                           1.16
 
Excusable
Delay (Art.
7)                                                                                                     1.17
 
Risk
Allocation/Insurance (Art.
8)                                                                                                     1.18
 
Alteon
Interface Commitment (Art
9)                                                                                                                1.19
 
Exculpatory
Clause in Post-Delivery Sale or Lease (Art. 9)1.20
 
Termination
for Certain Events (Art.
10)                                                                                                                1.21
 
FAA
Grounding                                                                                           1.22
 
FAA ETOPS
Prevention                                                                                                     1.23
 
Duplicate
Remedies                                                                                           1.24
 

 
2.      Line Station Spare Parts
Support
 

 

 
3.      Product Assurance (Exhibit
C)
 
Disclaimer
and Release; Exclusion of Liabilities (Part 2)3.1
 
Reimbursement
for Service Bulletin Corrections (Part 2)3.2
 
FAR 145
Requirements (Part
2)                                                                                                     3.3
 
Warranty
Claim, Response and Payment Time (Part 2)3.4
 
Maximum
Reimbursement (Part
2)                                                                                                                3.5
 
Additional
Service Life Policy Covered Components (Part 3)3.6
 
Conditions
and Limitations to the Service Life Policy (Part 3)3.7
 
Boeing
Back-Up of Supplier Turnaround Time3.8
 
Commitments
(Part 4)
 
Supplier
Warranty Commitment (Part
4)                                                                                                                3.9
 
Engine/Airframe
Interface Commitment (Part 5)3.10
 
Boeing
Indemnities Against Patent and
Copyright                                                                                                                3.11
 
Infringement
(Part 6)
 

 
4.      Performance
 
Performance
Guarantees/Data Base
Changes                                                                                                                4.1
 

 
5.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

 

 
6.  Assignment
 

 
7.  Confidential
Treatment
 



P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 




Sample
Insurance Certificate (Boeing)


BROKER’S  LETTERHEAD


[ date
]

Certificate
of Insurance Ref.
No.                                                                           


THIS
IS TO CERTIFY TO:





 
      


American
      Airlines, Inc. (hereinafter
“American”)








 
      


P.O.
      Box 619616








 
      


Dallas-Fort
      Worth Airport,
Texas  75261-9616






that
Insurers, EACH FOR HIS OWN PART AND NOT ONE FOR THE OTHER, are providing the
following insurance:





NAMED
      INSURED:


The
      Boeing Company (hereinafter
“Boeing”)









ADDRESS
      OF INSURED:


Post
      Office Box 3707








 
      


Seattle,
      Washington 98124-2207









PERIOD
      OF INSURANCE:


See
      attached Schedule of Insurers









GEOGRAPHICAL
      LIMITS:


Worldwide









EQUIPMENT
      INSURED:


All
      Boeing [model] [type] aircraft owned or operated by American that are the
      subject of that certain Purchase Agreement No._______ dated _______, 20xx
      between American and Boeing, as more particularly described on the
      attached Schedule of Aircraft, as such schedule may be amended from time
      to time.








P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      


DESCRIPTION OF
      COVERAGES









A. AIRCRAFT HULL
      INSURANCE


All
      risks of ground and flight physical damage coverage in respect of all
      aircraft owned by, leased to or operated by the Named Insured, including
      the Aircraft and any engines (including the Engines) and any parts
      (including the Parts) while attached to any such Aircraft or removed
      therefrom but not replaced, subject to policy terms, conditions,
      limitations, exclusions and
deductibles.









Amount of
      Insurance:


Agreed
      Value (as per Policy terms and
conditions).









B. AIRCRAFT LIABILITY
      INSURANCE


Aircraft
      Liability Insurance, including Bodily Injury (including passengers),
      Property Damage, Aircraft Liability, Passenger Legal Liability,
      Premises/Operations Liability, Personal Injury, and Contractual Liability
      Insurance, subject to policy terms, conditions, limitations, exclusion and
      deductibles.









Limit of
      Liability:


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


.








P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 



SPECIAL
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE ADDRESSEE(S)


Subject
to the policy terms, conditions, limitations, exclusions and deductibles and
solely with respect to Purchase Agreement No._____ dated as of _____, 1997 (the
“Purchase Agreement”) between American and The Boeing Company (“Boeing”), the
policies set forth in the attached Schedule of Insurers are amended to include
the following:





1.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, American is included as an
      additional Insured, but only to the extent that Boeing is obligated by its
      agreements to indemnify and hold harmless American under Section 8.1.1 of
      the Aircraft General Terms Agreement, AGTA-AAL, applicable to the Purchase
      Agreement and then only to the extent of coverage provided by the
      policy;









2.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Hull Insurance, each Insurer agrees to waive any
      rights of subrogation against American to the extent that Boeing has
      waived such rights by the terms of its agreements to indemnify American
      pursuant to the Purchase Agreement;









3.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, to the extent American is
      insured hereunder, such insurance shall not be invalidated or minimized by
      any action or inaction, omission or misrepresentation by the Insured
      regardless of any breach or violation of any warranty, declaration or
      condition contained in such
policies;









4.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, to provide that all
      provisions of the insurance coverages referenced above, except the limits
      of liability, will operate to give each Insured or additional insured the
      same protection as if there were a separate Policy issue to
      each;









5.


Solely
      with respect to Aircraft Liability Insurance, such insurance will be
      primary and not contributory nor excess with respect to any other
      insurance available for the protection of American, but only to the extent
      that Boeing is obligated by its agreements to indemnify and hold harmless
      American under Section 8.1.1 of the Aircraft General Terms Agreement,
      AGTA-AAL, applicable to the Purchase Agreement and then only to the extent
      of coverage provided by the policy;









6.


Each
      of the Aircraft Liability Insurance policy and Aircraft Hull Insurance
      policy provides that:  American shall not have any obligation or
      liability for premiums, commissions, calls or assessments in connection
      with such insurance;









7.


With
      respect to the Aircraft Liability Insurance, if a policy is canceled for
      any reason whatsoever, any substantial change is made which would reduce
      the amount of coverage as certified herein, or if a policy is allowed to
      lapse for nonpayment of premium, such cancellation, change or lapse shall
      not be effective as to American for thirty (30) days after receipt by
      American of written notice from the Insurers or their authorized
      representatives or Broker of such cancellation, change or lapse;
      and









8.


For
      the purposes of the Certificate, “American” is defined as American
      Airlines, Inc., its divisions, any wholly-owned subsidiary of American
      Airlines, Inc. which is assigned any rights or obligations in accordance
      with Article 9.1 of the AGTA, the assignees of each permitted under the
      applicable Purchase Agreement, and their respective directors, officers
      and employees.







P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 







 
      


THE
      BOEING COMPANY








 
      


AND
      ALL ITS SUBSIDIARIES









 
      


SCHEDULE
      OF SUBSCRIBING INSURERS








 
      


POLICY
      TERM:  DECEMBER 1, 1996 TO DECEMBER 1,
  1997










 
      


COVERAGES:









 
      


Aircraft
      Hull and Liability Insurance










 
      


POLICY




SUBSCRIBING INSURERS FOR
100% PARTICIPATIONNUMBER









 
      


SEVERAL LIABILITY
      NOTICE






The
subscribing insurers’ obligations under contracts of insurance to which they
subscribe are several and not joint and are limited solely to the extent of
their individual subscriptions.  The subscribing insurers are not
responsible for the subscription of any co-subscribing insurer who for any
reason does not satisfy all or part of its obligation.




P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 




Subject
to the terms, conditions, limitations and exclusions of the relative policies
except for the specific declarations contained in this certificate.


(signature)

(typed
name)

(title)




P.A.  No.
3219
Miscellaneous
Commitments for Model 787 Aircraft
BOEING
PROPRIETARY


 



 






 






EX-10.138AI
56
ex10138ai.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ai.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0672
Page
3



6-1162-TRW-0672


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport
Texas
75261-9616


Subject:                      Promotional
Support Agreement






Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft
(Aircraft).






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement.  All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement
have the same meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.


Recital.

Boeing
and Customer wish to enter into an agreement pursuant to which each party will
contribute equally to promotional programs in support of the entry into
Customer’s service of the Aircraft as more specifically provided
below.

Agreement.

1.           Definitions.

1.1           “Covered
Aircraft” shall mean those Aircraft identified on Table 1 to the Purchase
Agreement as of the date of signing of this Letter Agreement and any Substitute
Aircraft.

1.2           “Promotional
Support” shall mean marketing and promotion programs in support of the entry
into Customer service of the Covered Aircraft such as marketing research,
tourism development, corporate identity, direct marketing, video tape or still
photography, planning, design and production of collateral materials, management
of promotion programs, advertising campaigns or such other marketing and
promotional activities as the parties may mutually agree.

1.3           “[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

1.4           “Performance
Period” [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].


1.5           “Qualifying
Third Party Fees” shall mean [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].

2.           Commitment.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


3.           Methods of
Performance.

Subject
to the Commitment Limit, Customer may elect to receive the Promotional Support
in either or any combination of the following ways:

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.           Commencement
Date.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

5.           Project
Approval.

Following
the execution of this Letter Agreement, a Boeing Airline Marketing Services
representative will meet with Customer’s designated representative to review and
approve the extent, selection, scheduling, and funds disbursement process for
the Promotional Support to be provided pursuant to this Letter
Agreement.

6.           Confidential
Treatment.                                                      Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement or in the Purchase Agreement.

Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY


By                                           

Its            Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                             ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.

By                                                                                     

Its                                                                                    



P.A. No.
3219
Promotional_Support_Agreement Rev.:
2/07/06

BOEING
PROPRIETARY 

 



 






 






EX-10.138AJ
57
ex10138aj.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138aj.htm






 



 






 


American
Airlines, Inc.
6-1162-TRW-0673
Page 6



6-1162-TRW-0673


American
Airlines, Inc.
P. O. Box
619616
Dallas/Ft.
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616






Subject:


Confidentiality









Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 between The Boeing Company and American Airlines, Inc.
      relating to Model 787-923 Aircraft






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) is entered into on the date below and amends
and supplements the Purchase Agreement referenced above. All capitalized terms
used herein but not otherwise defined in this Letter Agreement shall have the
same meanings assigned thereto in Exhibit C to the Purchase Agreement or
elsewhere in such Purchase Agreement.

1.           Confidentiality
Obligation.

1.1           Except
as otherwise provided in this Letter Agreement, each party shall, and shall
ensure that its directors, officers, employees, Affiliates, agents, suppliers,
subcontractors and professional advisors (collectively, Representatives), at all
times, maintain strict confidence and secrecy in respect of all Confidential
Information (as defined below). Each party agrees to disclose Confidential
Information only to such of its Representatives as is required for the purpose
of implementing and administering the Purchase Agreement, and shall inform such
Representatives of the confidential nature of the Confidential Information and
instruct (and use best reasonable efforts to cause) such Representatives to
treat such Confidential Information in a manner consistent with this Section
1.

1.2           Neither
party shall use the Confidential Information for any purpose (including any
competitive or commercial purpose) other than in connection with the Purchase
Agreement and for purposes of consummating the transactions contemplated
thereby.

2.           Definition of Confidential
Information.

2.1           Subject
to the provisions of Section 2.2, "Confidential Information" means:

2.1.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];

2.1.2           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





 
      


a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


c)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





2.1.3                      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





 
      


a)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


b)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


c)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
  COMMISSION




         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
d)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
e)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
f)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
g)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
h)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
       PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];




i)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




j)      [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
          COMMISSION
PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
k)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
l)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
        PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
m)  [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
        PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
n)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
         PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
o)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
              PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
p)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
       PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
q)   [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
        PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];
     r)    [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION
               PURSUANT
TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];




s)  


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


t)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


u)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


v)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


w)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


x)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


y)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


z)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT];








 
      


aa)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


bb)


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND
      FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR
      CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]





2.2           The
following shall not constitute "Confidential Information" for purposes of this
Letter Agreement:

2.2.1                      Information
(other than the terms and conditions of the Pre-Closing Letters and the Business
Letters) already in a party's possession prior to its disclosure by the other
party as evidenced by the written or electronic records of such
party;

2.2.2                      Information
obtained from a third person or entity that is not prohibited from disclosing
such information to the receiving party as a result of a contractual, legal or
fiduciary obligation to the party whose information is being
disclosed;

2.2.3                      Information
that is or becomes generally available to the public, other than as a result of
disclosure by a party in violation of this Letter Agreement; or

2.2.4                      Information
that has been or is independently developed by a party or its Affiliates,
without violating such party’s obligations under this Letter
Agreement.

2.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.           Disclosure.

3.1           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]:





(a)  


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED




SEPARATELY
WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT]:

(A)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




 
      


;





(B)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]

(C)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


(D)              [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]




 
      


.









 
      


(b)


[CONFIDENTIAL
      PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A
      REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]








 
      


.





3.2             Either
party may disclose Confidential Information without the consent of the other
party when and to the extent required by any law applicable to such party or by
a Governmental Authority. If a party (the "Disclosing Party") is requested to
disclose any Confidential Information of the other party (the "Affected Party")
under the terms of a subpoena or order issued by a Governmental Authority, it
shall (i) notify the Affected Party immediately of the existence, terms and
circumstances surrounding such request, (ii) consult with the Affected Party on
the advisability of taking legally available steps to resist or narrow such
request, and (iii) if any disclosure of Confidential Information is required to
prevent the Disclosing Party from being held in contempt or subject to other
legal penalty, furnish only such portion of the Confidential Information as it
is legally compelled to disclose and, at the request of the Affected Party, use
commercially reasonable efforts to assist the Affected Party in obtaining an
order or other reliable assurance that confidential treatment shall be accorded
to the disclosed Confidential Information; and

3.3           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

3.4           In
addition to disclosures of Confidential Information permitted by this Letter
Agreement, either party may disclose Confidential Information as and to the
extent explicitly provided for in the Purchase Agreement.

4.           Remedies.

[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].








5.           Conflicts.

Subject to Section 2.3, to the extent
of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Letter Agreement
and any provisions regarding confidentiality of information set forth in the
Purchase Agreements, the provisions of this Letter Agreement shall, to the
extent of such conflict or inconsistency, control.

6.           Confidential
Treatment.

Customer and Boeing understand that
certain commercial and financial information contained in this Letter Agreement
are considered by Boeing and Customer as confidential. Customer and Boeing agree
that each will treat this Letter Agreement and the information contained herein
as confidential and will not, without the prior written consent of the other,
disclose this Letter Agreement or any information contained herein to any other
person or entity, except as provided in this Letter Agreement or in the
applicable Purchase Agreement.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY



By               

Its            Attorney-In-Fact                                                            


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
   ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.



By                                                              

Its                                                              





P.A. No.
3219
Confidentiality
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AK
58
ex10138ak.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138ak.htm






 



 






 



6-1162-TRW-0674


American
Airlines, Inc.
P.O. Box
619616
Dallas-Fort
Worth Airport, Texas 75261-9616



Subject:                      Business
Considerations





Reference:


Purchase
      Agreement No. 3219 (the Purchase Agreement) between The Boeing Company
      (Boeing) and American Airlines, Inc. (Customer) relating to
      Model 787-923 aircraft (Aircraft) and 787-323 and 787-823 Substitute
      Aircraft (each Substitute Aircraft)






This
letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement. All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same
meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.

1.           Basic Credit – Firm
Aircraft.

[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]



2.           Simulator
Package [CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]


[CONFIDENTIAL PORTION OMITTED AND FILED
SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL
TREATMENT].







3.           [CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH THE COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST
FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT].

4.           
Confidential
Treatment.

Customer
and Boeing understand that certain commercial and financial information
contained in this Letter Agreement are considered by Boeing and Customer as
confidential. Customer and Boeing agree that each will treat this Letter
Agreement and the information contained herein as confidential and will not,
without the prior written consent of the other, disclose this Letter Agreement
or any information contained herein to any other person or entity, except as
provided in this Letter Agreement and or the Purchase Agreement.


Very
truly yours,

THE
BOEING COMPANY

By                                          

Its           Attorney-In-Fact           


ACCEPTED
AND AGREED TO this

Date:
                               ,
2008

AMERICAN
AIRLINES, INC.


By                                          





 
      


Its                                          







P.A. No.
3219                                                                                                                     

Business
Considerations 
BOEING
PROPRIETARY

 



 






 






EX-10.138AL
59
ex10138al.htm
PURCHASE AGREEMENT NO. 3219

ex10138al.htm






 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments
















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-1F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 1


 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-1F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 2



 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-1F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 3


 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-2F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 1



 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-2F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 2



 



 






 



Table
1 to
Purchase
Agreement No. 3219
Aircraft
Delivery, Description, Price and Advance Payments















[CONFIDENTIAL
PORTION OMITTED AND FILED SEPARATELY WITH
THE
COMMISSION PURSUANT TO A REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT]
















AAL
48980-2F.TXT                                                                                        Boeing
Proprietary Page 3



 



 






 






EX-10.142
60
ex10142.htm
LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex10142.htm






 



 






 



AMR
CORPORATION
 
1998
LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
 
AS
AMENDED
 
SECTION
1.                                Purpose,
Definitions.
 
The
purpose of the AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended hereby
(the “Plan”) is to enable AMR Corporation (the “Company”) to attract, retain and
reward key employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates, and
strengthen the mutuality of interests between such key employees and the
Company's shareholders, by offering such key employees performance-based stock
incentives and/or other equity interests or equity-based incentives in the
Company, as well as performance-based incentives payable in
cash.  Since the adoption of this Plan, section 409A of the Code (as
defined below) has been enacted, and requires revision of the Plan document, as
well as do various awards issued thereunder.  The effective date of
this amendment shall be January 1, 2005.
 
For
purposes of the Plan, the following terms shall be defined as set forth
below:
 
(a)           “Affiliate”
means any entity other than the Company and its Subsidiaries that is designated
by the Board as a participating employer under the Plan, provided that the
Company directly or indirectly owns at least twenty percent (20%) of the
combined voting power of all classes of stock of such entity or at least twenty
percent (20%) of the ownership interests in such entity.
 
(b)           “Board”
means the Board of Directors of the Company.
 
(c)           “Book
Value” means, as of any given date, on a per share basis (i) the Stockholders'
Equity in the Company as of the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year as
reflected in the Company's audited consolidated balance sheet, subject to such
adjustments as the Committee shall specify, divided by (ii) the number of then
outstanding shares of Stock as of such year-end date (as adjusted by the
Committee for subsequent events).
 
(d)           “Cause”
means a felony conviction of a participant or the failure of a participant to
contest prosecution for a felony, or a participant's willful misconduct or
dishonesty, any of which is directly and materially harmful to the business or
reputation of the Company or any Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
(e)           “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, and any
successor thereto.
 
(f)           “Committee”
means the Committee referred to in Section 2 of the Plan. If at any time no
Committee shall be in office, then the functions of the Committee specified in
the Plan shall be exercised by the Board.
 
(g)           “Company”
means AMR Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Delaware, or any successor corporation.
 
(h)           “Deferred
Stock” means the right to receive Stock at the end of a specified deferral
period pursuant to Section 8.
 
(i)           “Disability”,
for awards not subject to section 409A of the Code, means disability as
determined under procedures established by the Committee for purposes of this
Plan.  For awards subject to section 409A, "Disability" shall have the
meaning given in section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Code; determination of such
Disability shall be made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor guidance thereto.
 
(j)           “Early
Retirement” means retirement, with the express consent for purposes of this Plan
of the Company at or before the time of such retirement, from active employment
with the Company and any Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
(k)           “Exchange
Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time,
and any successor thereto.
 
(1)           “Fair
Market Value” means, as of any given date, unless otherwise determined by the
Committee in good faith, the mean between the highest and lowest quoted selling
price, regular way, of the Stock on the New York Stock Exchange or, if no such
sale of Stock occurs on the New York Stock Exchange on such date, the fair
market value of the Stock as determined by the Committee in good faith;
provided, that, for Stock Options, Stock Appreciation Rights, Deferred Stock,
Restricted Stock, Performance Related Awards and Other Stock Based Awards
granted or exercised on or after November 16, 2006, fair market value means,
unless otherwise determined by the Committee in good faith, the last sale price
of the Stock on the New York Stock Exchange at the time of such grant or
exercise, as applicable or, if no such sale of Stock occurs on the New York
Stock Exchange on such date or the prior business day, the fair market value of
the Stock as determined by the Committee in good faith.
 
(m)           “Incentive
Stock Option” means any Stock Option intended to be and designated as an
“Incentive Stock Option” within the meaning of section 422 of the
Code.
 
(n)           “Non-Qualified
Stock Option” means any Stock Option that is not an Incentive Stock
Option.
 
(o)           “Normal
Retirement” means retirement from active employment with the Company and any
Subsidiary or Affiliate pursuant to the applicable retirement provisions of the
applicable pension plan of such entity.
 
(p)           “Other
Stock Based Award” means an award under Section 9 below that is valued in whole
or in part by reference to, or is otherwise based on, Stock.
 
(q)           “Performance
Related Awards” means an award made pursuant to Section 9 of Restricted Stock or
Deferred Stock or Other Stock Based Awards upon the determination by the
Committee that performance objectives established by the Committee have been
attained, in whole or in part.
 
(r)           “Plan”
means this AMR Corporation 1998 Long Term Incentive Plan as amended, and as it
may be amended hereafter from time to time.
 
(s)           “Restricted
Stock” means shares of Stock that are subject to restrictions under Section 7
below.
 
(t)           “Retirement”
means Normal or Early Retirement.
 
(u)           “Stock”
means the Common Stock, $1.00 par value per share, of the Company.
 
(v)           “Stock
Appreciation Right” means the right pursuant to an award granted under Section 6
below which entitles the grantee to receive, upon the exercise thereof in whole
or in part, an amount in shares of Stock equal in value to the excess of the
Fair Market Value (at the time of exercise) of one share of Stock over the base
price per share specified with respect to the Stock Appreciation Right,
multiplied by the number of shares in respect of which the Stock Appreciation
Right shall have been exercised. The number of shares to be issued shall be
calculated on the basis of the Fair Market Value of the shares at the time of
exercise, with any fractional share being payable in cash based on the Fair
Market Value at the time of exercise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Committee may elect, at any time and from time to time, in lieu of issuing all
or any portion of the shares of Stock otherwise issuable upon any exercise of
any such Stock Appreciation Right, to pay the grantee an amount in cash or other
marketable property with a value equivalent to the aggregate Fair Market Value
at the time of exercise of the number of shares of Stock that the Committee is
electing to settle in cash or other marketable property.
 
(w)           “Stock
Option” or “Option” means any option to purchase shares of Stock (including
Restricted Stock and Deferred Stock, if the Committee so determines) granted
pursuant to Section 5 below.
 
(x)           “Subsidiary”
means any corporation (other than the Company) in an unbroken chain of
corporations beginning with the Company if each of the corporations (other than
the last corporation in the unbroken chain) owns stock possessing fifty percent
(50%) or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock in one
of the other corporations in the chain.
 
In
addition, the terms “LTIP Awards,” “Performance Award”, “Performance Criteria”,
“Change in Control” “Potential Change in Control and “Change in Control Price”
shall have the meanings set forth, respectively, in Sections 2, 10(a), and
Section 11 below.
 
SECTION
2.                                Administration.
 
The Plan
shall be administered by a committee of not less than two members of the Board,
who shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the Board. In selecting
the members of the Committee, the Board shall take into account the requirements
for the members of the Committee to be treated as “Outside Directors” within the
meaning of section 162(m) of the Code and “Non-Employee Directors” for purposes
of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated under section 16 of the Exchange Act. The
functions of the Committee specified in the Plan shall be exercised by the
Board, if and to the extent that no Committee exists which has the authority to
so administer the Plan, or to the extent that the Committee is not comprised
solely of Non-Employee Directors for purposes of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated
under section 16 of the Exchange Act.
 
The
Committee shall have full authority to grant, pursuant to the terms of the Plan,
to officers and other key employees eligible under Section 4: (i) Stock Options
and Incentive Stock Options; (ii) Stock Appreciation Rights; (iii) Restricted
Stock; (iv) Deferred Stock; (v) Other Stock Based Awards; and/or (vi)
Performance Related Awards (collectively, the “LTIP Awards”).
 
In
particular the Committee shall have the authority:
 
(a)           to
select the officers and other key employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries
and Affiliates to whom LTIP Awards may from time to time be granted
hereunder;
 
(b)           to
determine whether and to what extent LTIP Awards, or any combination thereof,
are to be granted hereunder to one or more eligible employees;
 
(c)           subject
to the provisions of Sections 3, 5 and 10, to determine the number of shares to
be covered by each such award granted hereunder;
 
(d)           to
determine the terms and conditions, not inconsistent with the terms of the Plan,
of any award granted hereunder (including, but not limited to, the share price
and any restriction or limitation, or any vesting acceleration or waiver of
forfeiture restrictions regarding any Stock Option or other award and/or the
shares of Stock relating thereto, based in each case on such factors as the
Committee shall determine in its sole discretion);
 
(e)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances a Stock Option
may be settled in cash, Stock Appreciation Rights and/or Restricted Stock under
Section 5(k) or 5(1), as applicable, instead of Stock;
 
(f)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances an award of
Restricted Stock or Deferred Stock may be settled in cash;
 
(g)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Option grants
and/or other awards under the Plan and/or other cash awards made by the Company
are to be made, and operate, on a tandem basis vis-a-vis other awards under the
Plan and/or cash awards made outside of the Plan, or on an additive
basis;
 
(h)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Stock and other
amounts payable with respect to an award under this Plan may be deferred either
automatically or at the election of the participant (including providing for and
determining the amount (if any) of any deemed earnings on any deferred amount
during any deferral period); provided that any such deferral may be accomplished
only if exempt from, or in accordance with, section 409A of the
Code;
 
(i)           with
respect to an award of Restricted Stock, to determine whether the right to vote
will be granted with such award and/or whether any dividends declared with
respect to such award will be paid in cash, additional Restricted Stock, Other
Stock Based Awards, or not at all;
 
(j)           with
respect to an award of Deferred Stock, to determine whether any dividends
declared with respect to such award will be paid in cash, Restricted Stock,
additional Deferred Stock, Other Stock Based Awards, or not at all;
and
 
(k)           to
determine the terms and conditions pursuant to which an LTIP Award may vest on a
pro rata basis or be terminated.
 
The
Committee shall have the authority: to adopt, alter and repeal such rules,
guidelines and practices governing the Plan as it shall, from time to time, deem
advisable; to interpret the terms and provisions of the Plan and any award
issued under the Plan (and any agreements relating thereto); and to otherwise
supervise the administration of the Plan.
 
The
Committee may appoint in writing such person or persons as it may deem necessary
or desirable to carry out any of the duties and responsibilities of the
Committee hereunder and may delegate to such person or persons in writing such
duties, and confer upon such person or persons in writing, such powers,
discretionary or otherwise, as the Committee may deem appropriate. The Committee
may authorize from time to time the Chief Executive Officer and/or another
officer or officers of the Company or its Subsidiaries or Affiliates or a
subcommittee of members of the Committee to grant awards under this Plan to
officers and other key employees of the Company or its Subsidiaries or
Affiliates authorized or approved by the Committee (including grants of
individual awards to officers and other key employees authorized or approved by
the Committee in a pool of awards for a group of officers and/or other key
employees), subject to any conditions or limitations as the Committee may
establish; provided
that all awards to executive officers of the Company shall be approved by
the Committee, or a subcommittee thereof.
 
All
decisions made by the Committee pursuant to the provisions of the Plan shall be
made in the Committee's sole discretion and shall be final and binding on all
persons, including the Company and Plan participants.  Section 409A of
the Code applies to certain awards under this Plan, and it is intended that all
such awards shall be issued, administered, exercised and paid or transferred in
conformance therewith.  Accordingly, notwithstanding anything in
Section 12 to the contrary, the Committee shall have authority to amend or
restate the terms of a grant or award to preclude violation of section 409A of
the Code, without the consent of the recipient thereof.
 
SECTION
3.                                Stock
Subject to Plan.
 
The total
number of shares of Stock reserved and available for distribution under the Plan
shall be 5,000,000 shares, plus any shares remaining available for issuance
under the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, as of the Effective Date
hereof.  Such shares may consist, in whole or in part, of authorized
and unissued shares or treasury shares.
 
Subject
to Section 6(b)(iv) below, if any shares of Stock that have been optioned cease
to be subject to a Stock Option, or if any such shares of Stock that are subject
to any Restricted Stock or Deferred Stock Award, Other Stock Based Award or
Performance Related Award granted hereunder or granted under the 1988 Long Term
Incentive Plan, as amended, are forfeited or any such award otherwise terminates
without a payment being made to the participant in the form of Stock such shares
shall again be available for distribution in connection with future awards under
the Plan.
 
In the
event of any merger, reorganization, consolidation, recapitalization, stock
dividend, stock split or other change in corporate structure affecting the
Stock, such substitution or adjustment shall be made in the aggregate number of
shares reserved for issuance under the Plan, in the number and option price of
shares subject to outstanding Options granted under the Plan, and in the number
of shares subject to other outstanding awards granted under the Plan as may be
determined to be appropriate by the Committee, in its sole discretion, provided
that the number of shares subject to any award shall always be a whole number.
Such adjusted option price shall also be used to determine the amount payable by
the Company upon the exercise of any Stock Appreciation Right associated with
any Stock Option.
 
SECTION
4.                                Eligibility.
 
Officers
and other key employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates (but
excluding members of the Committee and any person who serves only as a director)
who are responsible for, or contribute to, the management, growth and/or
profitability of the business of the Company and/or its Subsidiaries and
Affiliates are eligible for awards under the Plan.
 
SECTION 5.                                Stock Options.
 
Stock
Options may be granted alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other awards
granted under the Plan.  Any Stock Option granted under the Plan shall
be in such form as the Committee may from time to time approve.
 
Stock
Options granted under the Plan may be of two types: (i) Incentive Stock Options;
and (ii) Non-Qualified Stock Options.
 
The
Committee shall have the authority to grant to any optionee Incentive Stock
Options, Non-Qualified Stock Options, or both types of Stock Options (in each
case with or without Stock Appreciation Rights); provided that, in no event
shall the number of shares of Stock subject to any Stock Options granted to any
employee during any calendar year exceed 250,000 shares, as such number may be
adjusted pursuant to Section 3.
 
Options
granted under the Plan shall be subject to the following terms and conditions
and shall contain such additional terms and conditions, not inconsistent with
the terms of the Plan, as the Committee shall deem desirable:
 
(a)           Option Price. The option
price per share of Stock purchasable under a Stock Option shall be determined by
the Committee at the time of grant; provided, that such option price may not be
less than the Fair Market Value of the Stock at the time the Stock Option is
granted.
 
(b)           Option Term. The term of each
Stock Option shall be fixed by the Committee, but no Stock Option shall be
exercisable more than ten (10) years after the date the Option is
granted.
 
(c)           Exercisability. Stock Options
shall be exercisable at such time or times and subject to such terms and
conditions as shall be determined by the Committee; provided, however, that
except as determined by the Committee, no Stock Option shall be exercisable
prior to the first anniversary date of the granting of the Option. If the
Committee provides, in its sole discretion, that any Stock Option is exercisable
only in installments, the Committee may waive such installment exercise
provisions at any time in whole or in part, based on such factors as the
Committee shall determine, in its sole discretion.
 
(d)           Method of Exercise. Subject
to whatever installment exercise provisions apply under Section 5(c) and subject
to whatever restrictions may be imposed by the Company, Stock Options may be
exercised in whole or in part at any time during the option period, by giving
written notice of exercise to the Company specifying the number of shares to be
purchased.
 
Such
notice shall be accompanied by payment in full of the purchase price. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, payment of the option price may be
made: (i) in cash or its equivalent; (ii) by exchanging shares of Stock owned by
the optionee (which are not the subject of any pledge or other security
interest), including in the case of a Non-Qualified Stock Option, Restricted
Stock or Deferred Stock subject to an award hereunder (or an award under the
terms of the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended); (iii) through an
arrangement with a broker approved by the Company whereby payment of the
exercise price is accomplished with the proceeds of the sale of Stock; or (iv)
by any combination of the foregoing, provided that the combined value of all
cash and cash equivalents paid and the Fair Market Value of any such Stock so
tendered to the Company, valued as of the time of such tender, is at least equal
to such option price.
 
If
payment of the option exercise price of a Non-Qualified Stock Option is made in
whole or in part in the form of Restricted Stock, such Restricted Stock (and any
replacement shares relating thereto) shall remain (or be) restricted or
deferred, as the case may be, in accordance with the original terms of the
Restricted Stock award in question, and any additional Stock received upon the
exercise shall be subject to the same forfeiture restrictions or deferral
limitations, unless otherwise determined by the Committee, in its sole
discretion.
 
No shares
of Stock shall be issued upon exercise of a stock option until full payment
therefor has been made. With respect to grants of Options exercisable prior to
January 1, 2005, the optionee shall generally have the rights to dividends or
other rights of a shareholder with respect to shares subject to the Option when
the optionee has given written notice of exercise, has paid in full for such
shares, and, if requested, has given the representation described in Section
14(a). Dividend equivalents or accumulated dividends or other rights of economic
value shall not be issued with Stock Options first becoming exercisable after
December 31, 2004.
 
(e)           Transferability of Options.
Unless the Committee shall permit (on such terms and conditions as it shall
establish) an Option to be transferred to a member of the participant's
immediate family or to a trust or similar vehicle for the benefit of such
immediate family members, no Option shall be assignable or transferable except
by will or the laws of descent and distribution, and except to the extent
required by law, no right or interest of any participant shall be subject to any
lien, obligation or liability of the participant.
 
(f)           Termination by Death. Subject
to Section 5(j), if an optionee's employment by the Company and any Subsidiary
or Affiliate terminates by reason of death, any Stock Option held by such
optionee may thereafter be exercised in accordance with the terms and conditions
established by the Committee.
 
(g)           Termination by Reason of
Disability. Subject to Section 5(j), if an optionee's employment by the
Company and any Subsidiary or Affiliate terminates by reason of Disability, any
Stock Option held by such optionee may thereafter be exercised by the optionee
in accordance with the terms and conditions established by the Committee. In the
event of termination of employment by reason of Disability, if an Incentive
Stock Option is exercised after the expiration of the exercise periods that
apply for purposes of section 422 of the Code, such Stock Option will thereafter
be treated as a Non-Qualified Stock Option.
 
(h)           Termination by Reason of
Retirement. Subject to Section 5(j), if an optionee's employment by the
Company and any Subsidiary or Affiliate terminates by reason of Normal or Early
Retirement, any Stock Option held by such optionee may thereafter be exercised
by the optionee in accordance with the terms and conditions established by the
Committee. In the event of termination of employment by reason of Retirement, if
an Incentive Stock Option is exercised after the expiration of the exercise
periods that apply for purposes of section 422 of the Code, such Stock Option
will thereafter be treated as a Non-Qualified Stock Option.
 
(i)           Other Termination. Unless
otherwise determined by the Committee, if an optionee's employment by the
Company or any Subsidiary or Affiliate terminates for any reason other than
death, Disability or Normal or Early Retirement, the Stock Option shall
thereupon terminate.
 
(j)           Incentive Stock Options.
Anything in the Plan to the contrary notwithstanding, no term of this Plan
relating to Incentive Stock Options shall be interpreted, amended or altered,
nor shall any discretion or authority granted under the Plan be so exercised, so
as to disqualify the Plan under section 422 of the Code, or, without the consent
of the optionee(s) affected, to disqualify any Incentive Stock Option under such
section 422.
 
(k)           Buyout Provisions. The
Committee may at any time offer to buy out for a payment in cash, Stock,
Deferred Stock or Restricted Stock, an option previously granted hereunder,
based on such terms and conditions as the Committee shall establish and
communicate to the participant at the time that such offer is made; provided
that no such buyout shall be permissible to the extent it to would subject the
Option to the requirements of section 409A of the Code or result in a violation
of section 409A of the Code.
 
(1)           Settlement Provisions. With
respect to options exercisable prior to January 1, 2005, if the option
agreement so provides at grant or is amended after grant, and prior to the
exercise (with the optionee’s consent), the Committee may require that all or
part of the shares to be issued with respect to the spread value of an exercised
Option take the form of Deferred or Restricted Stock, which shall be valued at
the time of exercise on the basis of the Fair Market Value (as determined by the
Committee) of such Deferred or Restricted Stock determined without regard to the
deferral limitations and/or the forfeiture restrictions involved.
 
SECTION
6.                                Stock Appreciation
Rights.
 
(a)           Grant and
Exercise.  Stock Appreciation Rights may be granted alone, in
addition to, or in tandem with, other awards granted under the Plan. Any Stock
Appreciation Right granted under the Plan shall be in such form as the Committee
may from time to time approve. Stock Appreciation Rights may be granted in
conjunction with all or part of any Stock Option granted under the Plan. In the
case of a Non-Qualified Stock Option, such rights may be granted either at or
after the time of the grant of such Stock Option. In the case of an Incentive
Stock Option, such rights may be granted only at the time of grant of such Stock
Option.
 
A Stock
Appreciation Right or applicable portion thereof granted with respect to a given
Stock Option shall terminate and no longer be exercisable upon the termination
or exercise of the related Stock Option, subject to such provisions as the
Committee may specify at grant where a Stock Appreciation Right is granted with
respect to less than the full number of shares covered by a related Stock
Option.
 
A Stock
Appreciation Right may be exercised by a grantee, subject to Section 6(b), in
accordance with the procedures established by the Committee from time to time
for such purposes. Upon such exercise, the grantee shall be entitled to receive
an amount determined in the manner prescribed in Section 6(b). Stock Options
relating to exercised Stock Appreciation Rights, and Stock Appreciation Rights
related to any exercised Stock Option, shall no longer be exercisable to the
extent that the related Stock Appreciation Rights or Stock Option, as the case
may be, have been exercised.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. Stock
Appreciation Rights shall be subject to such terms and conditions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Plan, as shall be determined from time
to time by the Committee, including the following:
 
(i)           Stock
Appreciation Rights shall be exercisable at such time and subject to such
conditions as the Committee shall specify, except that any Stock Appreciation
Right granted in tandem with a Stock Option (or portion thereof) shall be
exercisable only at such time or times and to the extent that the Stock Options
to which they relate shall be exercisable in accordance with the provisions of
Section 5 and this Section 6 of the Plan.
 
(ii)           Upon
the exercise of a Stock Appreciation Right, a grantee shall be entitled to
receive an amount in shares of Stock (or, solely to the extent determined by the
Committee, cash) equal in value to the excess of the Fair Market Value (at the
time of exercise) of one share of Stock over the base price per share specified
with respect to the Stock Appreciation Right, multiplied by the number of shares
in respect of which the Stock Appreciation Right shall have been exercised. When
payment is to be made in shares, the number of shares to be paid shall be
calculated on the basis of the Fair Market Value of the shares at the time of
exercise.  Notwithstanding anything in this Section 6(b)(ii) to the
contrary, the base price in respect of any Stock Appreciation Right shall not be
less than the Fair Market Value of the Stock at the time the Stock Appreciation
Right is granted, or in the case of a Stock Appreciation Right granted in tandem
with a Stock Option, the Fair Market Value at the time the related Stock Option
was granted.
 
(iii)           Stock
Appreciation Rights shall be transferable only to the extent that Stock Options
may be transferable under Section 5(e) of the Plan.
 
(iv)           Upon
the exercise of a Stock Appreciation Right, regardless of whether granted on a
stand-alone basis or in tandem with any Stock Option, only the number of shares
of Stock actually issued in connection with the exercise of such Stock
Appreciation Right (and not the corresponding number of shares of Stock related
to the Stock Appreciation Right (or portion thereof) being exercised) shall be
treated as issued under the Plan and, for the purpose of the limitation set
forth in Section 3 of the Plan on the number of shares of Stock issuable under
the Plan, the remaining number of shares of Stock related to such exercised
Stock Appreciation Right (or portion thereof), including the corresponding
number of shares related to any tandem Stock Option cancelled upon such
exercise, shall again be available for issuance under the Plan.
 
SECTION
7.                                Restricted
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Shares of
Restricted Stock may be issued either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with,
other awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the
Plan.  The Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom, and
the time or times at which, grants of Restricted Stock will be made, the number
of shares to be awarded, the price (if any) to be paid by the recipient of
Restricted Stock (subject to Section 7(b)), the time or times within which such
awards may be subject to forfeiture, and all other terms and conditions of the
awards.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Restricted Stock upon the attainment of
specified Performance Criteria or such other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Restricted Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Awards and Certificates. The
prospective recipient of a Restricted Stock award shall not have any rights with
respect to such award, unless and until the Company and such recipient have
executed an agreement evidencing the award and the recipient has delivered a
fully executed copy thereof to the Company, and has otherwise complied with the
applicable terms and conditions of such award.
 
(i)           The
purchase price for shares of Restricted Stock shall be equal to or less than
their par value and may be zero.
 
(ii)           Awards
of Restricted Stock must be accepted within a reasonable period (or such
specific period as the Committee may specify at grant) after the award date, by
executing a Restricted Stock award agreement and paying whatever price (if any)
is required under Section 7(b)(i).
 
(iii)           Each
participant receiving a Restricted Stock award shall be issued a stock
certificate in respect of such shares of Restricted Stock. Such certificate
shall be registered in the name of such participant, and shall bear an
appropriate legend referring to the terms, conditions, and restrictions
applicable to such award.
 
(iv)           The
Committee shall require that the stock certificates evidencing such shares be
held in custody by the Company until the restrictions thereon shall have lapsed,
and that, as a condition of any Restricted Stock award, the participant shall
have delivered a stock power, endorsed in blank, relating to the Stock covered
by such award.
 
(c)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Restricted Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 7 shall be subject
to the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement, during a period set by
the Committee commencing with the date of such award (the “Restriction Period”),
the participant shall not be permitted to sell, transfer, pledge or assign
shares of Restricted Stock awarded under the Plan. Within these limits and
subject to Sections 7(c)(iv) and/or 7(c)(v), the Committee, in its sole
discretion, may provide for the lapse of such restrictions in installments and
may accelerate or waive such restrictions in whole or in part, based on service,
Performance Criteria and/or such other factors as the Committee may determine,
in its sole discretion.
 
(ii)           If
and when the Restriction Period expires without a prior forfeiture of the
Restricted Stock subject to such Restriction Period, certificates for an
appropriate number of unrestricted shares of Stock shall be delivered to the
participant promptly (unless the Committee decides pursuant to Section 2(f) to
settle the award in cash).
 
(iii)           The
voting rights and/or dividend rights, if any, of the Restricted Stock award
shall be established by the Committee pursuant to Section 2(i).
 
(iv)           An
award of Restricted Stock, where the Restriction Period is based on Performance
Criteria, shall have a Restriction Period of at least one (1) year.
 
(v)           An
award of Restricted Stock, where the Restriction Period is based on service,
shall have a Restriction Period of at least three (3) years.
 
(vi)           In
determining the Restriction Period for any award of Restricted Stock granted in
replacement of a non-Plan award of Stock or non-Plan award valued by reference
to the Stock, the Restriction Period shall be deemed to have commenced on the
date such non-Plan award was originally granted.
 
(d)           Minimum Value Provisions. In
order to better ensure that award payments actually reflect the performance of
the Company and service of the participant, the Committee may provide, in its
sole discretion, for a tandem performance-based or other award designed to
guarantee a minimum value, payable in cash or Stock to the recipient of a
Restricted Stock award, subject to such Performance Criteria, future service,
deferral and other terms and conditions as may be specified by the
Committee.  Any deferral terms shall comply with section 409A of the
Code.
 
SECTION
8.                                Deferred
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Deferred
Stock may be awarded either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other
awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the Plan. The
Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom and the time or times at
which Deferred Stock shall be awarded, the number of shares of Deferred Stock to
be awarded to any person, the duration of the period (the “Deferral Period”)
during which, and the conditions under which, receipt of the Stock will be
deferred, and the other terms and conditions of the award in addition to those
set forth in Section 8(b).  Awards of Deferred Stock may be subject to
the provisions of section 409A of the Code, and it is intended that any such
grant shall be made and administered in compliance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Deferred Stock upon the attainment of
specified Performance Criteria or such other factors or criteria as the
Committee shall determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Deferred Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Deferred Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 8 shall be subject to
the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement referred to in Section
8(b)(iv) below, Deferred Stock awards may not be sold, assigned, transferred,
pledged or otherwise encumbered during the Deferral Period. At the expiration of
the Deferral Period (or the Elective Deferral Period referred to in Section
8(b)(iii), where applicable), stock certificates shall be delivered to the
participant, or his legal representative, in a number equal to the shares
covered by the Deferred Stock award (unless the Committee decides pursuant to
Section 2(f) to settle the award in cash).
 
(ii)           Subject
to Sections 8(b)(vi) and/or 8(b)(vii), the Committee may accelerate the vesting
of all or any part of any Deferred Stock award and/or waive the deferral
limitations in whole or in part, based on service, Performance Criteria and/or
such other factors as the Committee may determine, in its sole
discretion.
 
(iii)           Deferral
of awards (or any installment thereof) shall not be permitted except in
conformance with Internal Revenue Service transitional guidance under section
409A of the Code that does not result in a violation of section 409A of the
Code, including Internal Revenue Service Notices 2005-1, 2006-67 and
2007-86.
 
(iv)           Each
award shall be confirmed by, and subject to the terms of, a Deferred Stock
agreement executed by the Company and the participant.
 
(v)           The
dividend rights, if any, of the Deferred Stock award established by the
Committee pursuant to Section 2(j).  Such rights shall be issued in
conformance with section 409A of the Code.
 
(vi)           An
award of Deferred Stock, where the Deferral Period is based on Performance
Criteria, shall have a Deferral Period of at least one (1) year.
 
(vii)           An
award of Deferred Stock, where the Deferral Period is based on service, shall
have a Deferral Period of at least three (3) years.
 
(viii)                      In
determining the Deferral Period for any award of Deferred Stock granted in
replacement of a non-Plan award of Stock or non-Plan award valued by reference
to the Stock, the Deferral Period shall be deemed to have commenced on the date
such non-Plan award was originally granted.
 
(c)           Minimum Value Provisions. In
order to better ensure that award payments actually reflect the performance of
the Company and service of the participant, the Committee may provide, in its
sole discretion, for a tandem performance-based or other award designed to
guarantee a minimum value, payable in cash or Stock to the recipient of a
Deferred Stock award, subject to such Performance Criteria, future service,
deferral and other terms and conditions as may be specified by the
Committee.
 
SECTION
9.                                Other
Stock Based Awards.
 
(a)           Administration. Other awards
of Stock and other awards that are valued in whole or in part by reference to,
or are otherwise based on, Stock (“Other Stock Based Awards”), including,
without limitation, performance shares, convertible preferred stock, convertible
debentures, exchangeable securities and Stock awards or options valued by
reference to Book Value or subsidiary performance, may be granted either alone
or in addition to, Restricted Stock, Deferred Stock, Stock Purchase Rights or
Performance Related Awards granted under the Plan and/or cash awards made
outside of the Plan.
 
Subject
to the provisions of the Plan, the Committee shall have authority to determine
the persons to whom and the time or times at which such awards shall be made,
the amount of such awards, and all other conditions of the awards including any
dividend and/or voting rights, but, where applicable, in conformity with section
409A of the Code.  Subject to Sections 9(b)(iv) and 9(b)(v), the
Committee may also provide for the grant of Stock upon the attainment of
specified Performance Criteria or such other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Other Stock Based Awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. Other
Stock Based Awards made pursuant to this Section 9 shall be subject to the
following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement referred to in Section
9(b)(ii) below, awards made under this Section 9 may not be sold, assigned,
transferred, pledged or otherwise encumbered prior to the date on which any
shares are issued or amounts are paid, or, if later, the date on which any
applicable restriction, performance or deferral period lapses. Subject to
Sections 9(b)(iv) and/or 9(b)(v), the Committee, in its sole discretion, may
accelerate the vesting of all or any part of any Other Stock Based Award, and/or
waive any restrictions or deferral limitations in whole or in part, based on
service, Performance Criteria and/or other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion but only to the extent permitted under section
409A of the Code with respect to Other Stock Based Awards that are subject to
section 409A of the Code.
 
(ii)           Each
award under this Section 9 shall be confirmed by, and subject to the terms of,
an agreement or other instrument by the Company and by the
participant.
 
(iii)           Stock
(including securities convertible into Stock) issued on a bonus basis under this
Section 9 may be issued for no cash consideration. Stock (including securities
convertible into Stock) purchased pursuant to a purchase right awarded under
this Section 9 shall be purchased at price(s) determined by the Committee, in
its sole discretion.
 
(iv)           Any
Other Stock Based Award that has a Restriction Period or Deferral Period that is
based on Performance Criteria shall have a Restriction Period or Deferral
Period, as the case may be, of at least one (1) year.
 
(v)           Any
Other Stock Based Award that has a Restriction Period or Deferral Period that is
based on service shall have a Restriction Period or Deferral Period, as the case
may be, of at least three (3) years.
 
(vi)           In
determining the Restriction Period or Deferral Period for any Other Stock Based
Award granted in replacement of a non-Plan award of Stock or non-Plan award
valued by reference to the Stock, the Restriction Period or Deferral Period, as
applicable, shall be deemed to have commenced on the date such non-Plan award
was originally granted.
 
SECTION
10. Performance Related Awards.
 
(a)           Performance Objectives.
Notwithstanding anything else contained in the Plan to the contrary, unless the
Committee otherwise determines at the time of grant, any award of Restricted
Stock or Deferred Stock or Other Stock Based Awards to an officer who is subject
to the reporting requirements of section 16(a) of the Exchange Act other than an
award which will vest solely on the basis of the passage of time, shall become
vested, if at all, upon the determination by the Committee that performance
objectives established by the Committee have been attained, in whole or in part
(a “Performance Award”). Such performance objectives shall be determined over a
measurement period or periods established by the Committee (which period or
periods shall not be less than one (1) year) and related to at least one of the
following criteria, which may be determined solely by reference to the
performance of: (i) the Company; (ii) a Subsidiary; (iii) an Affiliate; (iv) a
division or unit of any of the foregoing or based on comparative performance of
any of the foregoing relative to past performance or to other companies: (A)
return on equity; (B) total shareholder return; (C) revenues; (D) cash flows,
revenues and/or earnings relative to other parameters (e.g., net or gross
assets); (E) operating income; (F) return on investment; (G) changes in the
value of the Stock; and (H) return on assets (the “Performance Criteria”).
Excluding Stock Options and/or Stock Appreciation Rights granted hereunder, the
maximum number of shares of Stock that may be subject to any such Performance
Award granted to any key employee in any calendar year shall not exceed 100,000
shares, as such number may be adjusted pursuant to Section 3.
 
(b)           Annual Incentive
Compensation. The Committee may, in addition to the Performance Awards
described above, pay cash amounts under the Plan or any other plan or
arrangement approved by the Committee, provided such other plan or arrangement
is in conformity with the provisions of this Section 10(b), to any officer of
the Company or any Subsidiary who is subject to the reporting requirements of
section 16(a) of the Exchange Act upon the achievement, in whole or in part, of
performance goals or objectives established in writing by the Committee with
respect to such performance periods as the Committee shall determine. Any such
goals or objectives shall be based on one or more of the Performance Criteria.
Notwithstanding anything else contained herein to the contrary, the maximum
amount of any such cash payment to any single officer with respect to any
calendar year shall not exceed the lesser of (i) $2,000,000; or (ii) twice the
officer's annual base salary as in effect on the last day of the preceding
fiscal year.
 
(c)           Interpretation.
Notwithstanding anything else contained in the Plan to the contrary, to the
extent required to so qualify any Performance Award as other performance based
compensation within the meaning of section 162(m)(4)(C) of the Code, the
Committee shall not be entitled to exercise any discretion otherwise authorized
under the Plan (such as the right to accelerate vesting without regard to the
achievement of the relevant performance objectives) with respect to such
Performance Award if the ability to exercise such discretion (as opposed to the
exercise of such discretion) would cause such award to fail to qualify as other
performance based compensation.
 
SECTION
11.                                Change
in Control Provisions.
 
(a)           Impact of
Event.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 7(c)(iv),
7(c)(v), 8(b)(vi), 8(b)(vii), 9(b)(iv) and 9(b)(v), in the event
of:
 
(i)           a
“Change in Control” as defined in Section 11(b) or a “Potential Change in
Control” as defined in Section 11(c):
 
(A)           Any
Stock Options awarded under the Plan not previously exercisable and vested shall
become fully exercisable and vested;
 
(B)           The
restrictions and deferral limitations applicable to any Restricted Stock,
Deferred Stock, Other Stock Based Awards and Performance Awards, in each case to
the extent not already vested under the Plan, shall lapse and such shares and
awards shall be deemed fully vested and any Performance Criteria shall be deemed
met at target; and
 
(C)           The
value of all outstanding LTIP Awards to the extent vested may at the sole
discretion of the Committee at or after grant but prior to any Change in
Control, be cashed out on the basis of the “Change in Control Price” as defined
in Section 11(d) as of the date such Change in Control or Potential Change in
Control is determined to have occurred or such other date as the Committee may
determine prior to the Change in Control, provided that payment of awards
subject to section 409A of the Code shall be made in a manner compliant with
section 409A.
 
(b)           Definition of “Change in
Control”.  For purposes of Section 11(a), a “Change in Control”
means the happening of any of the following:
 
(i)           When
any “person” as defined in section 3(a)(9) of the Exchange Act and as used in
sections 13(d) and 14(d) thereof, including a “group” as defined in section
13(d) of the Exchange Act but excluding the Company, any Subsidiary or any
employee benefit plan sponsored or maintained by the Company or any Subsidiary
(including any trustee of such plan acting as trustee), directly or indirectly,
becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act,
as amended from time to time), of securities of the Company representing fifteen
percent (15%) or more of the combined voting power of the Company's then
outstanding securities;
 
(ii)           The
individuals who, as of December 31, 2008, constitute the Board (the “Incumbent
Board”) cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board;
provided, however, that any individual becoming a director subsequent to such
date whose election, or nomination for election by the Company's shareholders,
was approved by a vote of at least a majority of the directors then comprising
the Incumbent Board shall be considered as though such individual were a member
of the Incumbent Board, but excluding, for this purpose, any such individual
whose initial assumption of office occurs as a result of an actual or threatened
election contest with respect to the election or removal of directors or other
actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or consents by or on behalf of a
person other than the Board; or
 
(iii)           Consummation
of a reorganization, merger or consolidation or sale or other disposition of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company or the acquisition of assets
of another corporation (a “Business Combination”), in each case, unless,
following such Business Combination: (A) all or substantially all of the
individuals and entities who were the beneficial owners, respectively, of the
then outstanding shares of Stock of the Company and the combined voting power of
the then outstanding voting securities of the Company entitled to vote generally
in the election of directors immediately prior to such Business Combination
beneficially own, directly or indirectly, more than sixty percent (60%) of,
respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock and the combined
voting power of the then outstanding voting securities entitled to vote
generally in the election of directors, as the case may be, of the corporation
resulting from such Business Combination (including, without limitation, a
corporation which as a result of such transaction owns the Company or all or
substantially all of the Company's assets either directly or through one or more
subsidiaries); (B) no person (excluding any employee benefit plan (or related
trust) of the Company or such corporation resulting from such Business
Combination) beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, fifteen percent (15%) or
more of, respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination or the combined voting
power of the then outstanding voting securities of such corporation except to
the extent that such ownership existed prior to the Business Combination; and
(C) at least a majority of the members of the board of directors of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination were members of the
Incumbent Board at the time of the execution of the initial agreement, or of the
action of the Board, providing for such Business Combination; or
 
(iv)           Approval
by the shareholders of the Company of a complete liquidation or dissolution of
the Company.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 11(b) hereinabove, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or change in
effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial portion of the
assets of the Company, in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the
specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii)
or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
(c)           Definition of Potential Change in
Control.  For purposes of Section 11(a), a “Potential Change in
Control” means the happening of any one of the following:
 
(i)           The
approval by shareholders of an agreement by the Company, the consummation of
which would result in a Change in Control of the Company as defined in Section
11(b); or
 
(ii)           The
acquisition of beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any entity,
person or group (other than the Company or Subsidiary or any Company employee
benefit plan (including any trustee of such plan acting as such trustee)) of
securities of the Company representing five percent (5%) or more of the combined
voting power of the Company’s outstanding securities and the adoption by the
Board of a resolution to the effect that a Potential Change in Control of the
Company has occurred for purposes of this Plan.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 11(c) hereinabove, a Potential Change in Control shall be
deemed to have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or
change in effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial
portion of the assets of the Company, in each case as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such
purpose the specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v),
(vi) and (vii) or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any
elective percentage.
 
(d)           Change in Control Price. For
the purposes of this Section 11, “Change in Control Price” means the highest
price per share paid in any transaction reported on the New York Stock Exchange
Composite Index, or paid or offered in any bona fide transaction related to a
potential or actual Change in Control of the Company at any time during the
sixty (60) day period immediately preceding the occurrence of the Change in
Control, in each case as determined by the Committee except that, in the case of
Incentive Stock Options and Stock Appreciation Rights relating to Incentive
Stock Options, such price shall be based only on transactions reported for the
date on which the optionee exercises such Incentive Stock Options or Stock
Appreciation Rights or, where applicable, the date on which a cashout occurs
under Section 11(a)(i)(C).
 
SECTION
12.  Amendments and Termination.
 
The Board
may amend, alter, or discontinue the Plan, but no amendment, alteration, or
discontinuation shall be made which would impair the rights of an optionee or
participant under an LTIP Award theretofore granted, without the optionee's or
participant's consent.
 
The
Committee may amend the terms of any Stock Option or other award theretofore
granted, prospectively or retroactively, but subject to Section 2 above, no such
amendment shall impair the rights of any holder without the holder's
consent.
 
Subject
to the above provisions, the Board shall have broad authority to amend the Plan
to take into account changes in applicable securities and tax laws and
accounting rules, as well as other developments.
 
Notwithstanding
the above, no amendment shall be made that shall constitute an impermissible
acceleration of an award that is subject to section 409A of the Code and awards
subject to section 409A may be amended without participant consent to the extent
provided in Section 2 of this Plan.
 
SECTION
13. Unfunded Status of Plan.
 
The Plan
is intended to constitute an “unfunded” plan for incentive and deferred
compensation. With respect to any payments not yet made to a participant or
optionee by the Company, nothing contained herein shall give any such
participant or optionee any rights that are greater than those of a general
creditor of the Company. In its sole discretion, the Committee may authorize the
creation of trusts or other arrangements to meet the obligations created under
the Plan to deliver Stock or payments in lieu of or with respect to awards
hereunder; provided, however, that unless the Committee otherwise determines
with the consent of the affected participant, the existence of such trusts or
other arrangements is consistent with the “unfunded” status of the
Plan.  Trusts or other arrangements so established shall be subject to
the limitations of section 409A(b) of the Code.
 
SECTION
14. General Provisions.
 
(a)           The
Committee may require each person purchasing shares pursuant to a Stock Option
or other award under the Plan to represent to and agree with the Company in
writing that the optionee or participant is acquiring the shares without a view
to distribution thereof. The certificates for such shares may include any legend
which the Committee deems appropriate to reflect any restrictions on
transfer.
 
All
certificates for shares of Stock or other securities delivered under the Plan
shall be subject to such stock-transfer orders and other restrictions as the
Committee may deem advisable under the rules, regulations, and other
requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission, any stock exchange upon
which the Stock is then listed, and any applicable federal or state securities
law, and the Committee may cause a legend or legends to be put on any such
certificates to make appropriate reference to such restrictions.
 
(b)           Nothing
contained in this Plan shall prevent the Board from adopting other or additional
compensation arrangements, subject to stockholder approval if such approval is
required, and such arrangements may be either generally applicable or applicable
only in specific cases.
 
(c)           The
adoption of the Plan shall not confer upon any employee of the Company or any
Subsidiary or Affiliate any right to continued employment with the Company or a
Subsidiary or Affiliate, as the case may be, nor shall it interfere in any way
with the right of the Company or a Subsidiary or Affiliate to terminate the
employment of any of its employees at any time.
 
(d)           Except
as the participant and the Company may otherwise agree, no later than the date
as of which an amount first becomes includible in the gross income of the
participant for federal income tax purposes with respect to any award under the
Plan, the participant shall pay to the Company, or make arrangements
satisfactory to the Committee regarding the payment of, any federal, state, or
local taxes of any kind required by law to be withheld with respect to such
amount. Unless otherwise determined by the Committee, withholding obligations
may be settled with Stock, including Stock that is part of the award that gives
rise to the withholding requirement. The obligations of the Company under the
Plan shall be conditional on such payment or arrangements, and the Company and
its Subsidiaries or Affiliates shall, to the extent permitted by law, have the
right to deduct any such taxes from any payment of any kind otherwise due to the
participant.
 
(e)           The
actual or deemed reinvestment of dividends or dividend equivalents in additional
Restricted Stock (or in Deferred Stock or other types of Plan awards) at the
time of any dividend payment shall only be permissible if sufficient shares of
Stock are available under Section 3 for such reinvestment (taking into account
then outstanding Stock Options and other Plan awards).
 
(f)           The
Committee may permit a participant to postpone the delivery of Stock under any
award, including a Stock Option, under the Plan upon such terms and conditions
as the Committee shall determine, but, with respect to awards subject to section
409A of the Code, only in conformance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
(g)           The
Plan and all awards made and actions taken thereunder shall be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware.
 
SECTION
15. Effective Date of Plan.
 
As
amended, the Plan shall be effective as of May 21, 1998, with changes effected
hereunder effective as of January 1, 2005.
 
SECTION
16. Term of Plan.
 
No LTIP
Award shall be granted pursuant to the Plan on or after the tenth anniversary of
the date of shareholder approval, but awards granted prior to such tenth
anniversary may extend beyond that date, in accordance with the terms of such
awards.
 
SECTION
17. Applicability to Grants under 1988 Plan.
 
The
provisions of the Plan relating to stock options, stock appreciation rights,
restricted stock awards, deferred stock awards, other stock-based awards or
performance related awards shall apply to, and govern existing and subsequent
stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock awards, deferred
stock awards, other stock-based awards or performance related awards granted
under the 1988 Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended.
 


 



 






 






EX-10.149
61
ex10149.htm
DIRECTORS PENSION BENEFITS, AMENDED

ex10149.htm







Amended
and Restated Air Transportation Plan
for Non-Employee Directors
of AMR Corporation


Section
409A of the Internal Revenue Code applies to the complimentary air
transportation provided to the non-employee Directors of AMR Corporation
(“AMR”).  In order to avoid imposition of certain income taxes,
penalty taxes and interest, the air transportation plan for non-employee
Directors of AMR is hereby amended and restated as provided below, effective as
of January 1, 2005.

Each
current or former non-employee Director of AMR and his or her spouse or
companion and dependent children (under the age of twenty-three (23)) are
entitled to unlimited complimentary air transportation in any available class of
service on American Airlines and American Eagle (“American”) and free Admirals
Club memberships.
 
If the
Director served on the AMR Board of Directors (the “Board”) for at least ten
(10) years and retired from the Board on or after age seventy (70), American
will continue to provide complimentary air transportation for the individuals
described above following his or her service on the Board until the later of the
death of the Director and the Director’s spouse or companion.  If the
Director served on the Board for less than ten (10) years or retired from the
Board prior to age seventy (70), American will continue to provide complimentary
air transportation for the individuals described above for the number of years
the Director served on the Board, commencing with the date on which the Director
no longer is a member of the Board.
 
American
will be responsible for any taxes on such air transportation and will reimburse
each Director for any taxes paid for this transportation.  Tax
reimbursements will be made not later than the last day of the taxable year
following the year in which the Director paid these taxes, and such
reimbursement cannot be further deferred.  Such air transportation and
tax reimbursements cannot be exchanged for any other benefit or liquidated for
other compensation, and the amount of air transportation used in a particular
year will not otherwise affect the air transportation the Director may use in
any other year.
 
The Board
may amend or terminate this plan at any time.
 




EX-10.150
62
ex10150.htm
TRAVEL PLAN FOR NON-EMPLOYEE DIRECTORS, AMENDED

ex10150.htm






AMR
CORPORATION
 
2003
EMPLOYEE STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
 
AS
AMENDED
 
SECTION
1. Purpose;
Definitions.
 
The
purpose of the AMR Corporation 2003 Employee Stock Incentive Plan, as amended
hereby (the “Plan”) is to enable AMR Corporation (the “Company”) to retain and
reward employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates, and
strengthen the mutuality of interests between such employees and the Company’s
shareholders, by offering such employees equity-based incentives in the
Company.  Since the adoption of this Plan, section 409A of the Code
(as defined below) has been enacted, and requires revision of the Plan document,
as well as do various awards issued thereunder.  The effective date of
this amendment shall be January 1, 2005.
 
For
purposes of the Plan, the following terms shall be defined as set forth
below:
 
(a)           “Affiliate”
means any entity other than the Company and its Subsidiaries that is designated
by the Board as a participating employer under the Plan, provided that the
Company directly or indirectly owns at least twenty percent (20%) of the
combined voting power of all classes of stock of such entity or at least twenty
percent (20%) of the ownership interests in such entity.
 
(b)           “Board”
means the Board of Directors of the Company.
 
(c)           “Cause”
means a felony conviction of a participant or the failure of a participant to
contest prosecution for a felony, or a participant’s willful misconduct or
dishonesty, any of which is directly and materially harmful to the business or
reputation of the Company or any Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
(d)           “Code”
means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, and any
successor thereto.
 
(e)           “Committee”
means the Committee referred to in Section 2 of the Plan. If at any time no
Committee shall be in office, then the functions of the Committee specified in
the Plan shall be exercised by the Board.
 
(f)           “Company”
means AMR Corporation, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of
Delaware, or any successor corporation.
 
(g)           “Deferred
Stock” means the right to receive Stock at the end of a specified deferral
period pursuant to Section 7.
 
(h)           “Disability”,
for awards not subject to section 409A of the Code, means disability as
determined under a long term disability plan of the Company.  For
awards subject to section 409A, “Disability” shall have the meaning given in
section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Code; determination of such Disability shall be
made by the Committee consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or
successor guidance thereto.
 
(i)           “Early
Retirement” means retirement, with the express consent of the Company at or
before the time of such retirement, from active employment by any Subsidiary or
Affiliate.
 
(j)           “Exchange
Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time,
and any successor thereto.
 
(k)           “Fair
Market Value” means, as of any given date, unless otherwise determined by the
Committee in good faith, the mean between the highest and lowest quoted selling
price, regular way, of the Stock on the New York Stock Exchange or, if no such
sale of Stock occurs on the New York Stock Exchange on such date, the fair
market value of the Stock as determined by the Committee in good
faith.
 
(1)           “Normal
Retirement” means retirement from active employment by any Subsidiary or
Affiliate pursuant to the retirement provisions of the applicable pension plan
of such entity.
 
(m)           “Plan”
means this AMR Corporation 2003 Stock Incentive Plan as amended hereby, and as
it may be amended from time to time hereafter.
 
(n)           “Restricted
Stock” means shares of Stock that are subject to restrictions under Section 6
below.
 
(o)           “Retirement”
means Normal or Early Retirement.
 
(p)           “Stock”
means the Common Stock, $1.00 par value per share, of the Company.
 
(q)           “Stock
Option” or “Option” means any option to purchase shares of Stock (including
Restricted Stock and Deferred Stock, if the Committee so determines) granted
pursuant to Section 5 below.
 
(r)           “Subsidiary”
means any corporation (other than the Company) in an unbroken chain of
corporations beginning with the Company if each of the corporations (other than
the last corporation in the unbroken chain) owns stock possessing fifty percent
(50%) or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock in one
of the other corporations in the chain.
 
(s)           In
addition, the terms “Awards,” “Award,” “Change in Control,” “Potential Change in
Control” and “Change in Control Price” shall have the meanings set forth,
respectively, in Section 8 below.
 
SECTION
2. Administration.
 
The Plan
shall be administered by a committee of not less than two members of the Board,
who shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the Board. In selecting
the members of the Committee, the Board shall take into account the requirements
for the members of the Committee to be treated as “Non-Employee Directors” for
purposes of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated under section 16 of the Exchange Act. The
functions of the Committee specified in the Plan shall be exercised by the
Board, if and to the extent that no Committee exists which has the authority to
so administer the Plan, or to the extent that the Committee is not comprised
solely of Non-Employee Directors for purposes of Rule 16b-3, as promulgated
under section 16 of the Exchange Act.
 
The
Committee shall have full authority to grant, pursuant to the terms of the Plan,
to officers and other key employees eligible under Section 4: (i) Stock Options;
(ii) Restricted Stock; and/or (iii) Deferred Stock (collectively, the “Awards”
and singularly, an “Award”).
 
In
particular the Committee shall have the authority:
 
(a)           to
select the employees of the Subsidiaries and Affiliates to whom Awards may from
time to time be granted hereunder;
 
(b)           to
determine whether and to what extent Awards, or any combination thereof, are to
be granted hereunder to one or more eligible employees;
 
(c)           subject
to the provisions of Sections 3 and 4, to determine the number of shares to be
covered by each such award granted hereunder;
 
(d)           to
determine the terms and conditions, not inconsistent with the terms of the Plan,
of any award granted hereunder (including, but not limited to, the share price
and any restriction or limitation, or any vesting, acceleration or waiver of
forfeiture restrictions regarding any Stock Option or other award and/or the
shares of Stock relating thereto, based in each case on such factors as the
Committee shall determine in its sole discretion);
 
(e)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances a Stock Option
may be settled in cash, Restricted Stock and/or Deferred Stock under Section
5(f) or 5(g), as applicable, instead of Stock;
 
(f)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances an award of
Restricted Stock or Deferred Stock may be settled in cash;
 
(g)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Option grants
and/or other awards under the Plan and/or other cash awards made by the Company
are to be made, and operate, on a tandem basis vis-a-vis other awards under the
Plan and/or cash awards made outside of the Plan, or on an additive
basis;
 
(h)           to
determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Stock and other
amounts payable with respect to an award under this Plan shall be deferred
either automatically or at the election of the participant (including providing
for and determining the amount (if any) of any deemed earnings on any deferred
amount during any deferral period) provided that any such deferral may be
accomplished only if exempt from, or in accordance with, section 409A of the
Code;
 
(i)           with
respect to an award of Restricted Stock, to determine whether the right to vote
will be granted with such award and/or whether any dividends declared with
respect to such award will be paid in cash, additional Restricted Stock,
Deferred Stock or not at all;
 
(j)           with
respect to an award of Deferred Stock, to determine whether any dividends
declared with respect to such award will be paid in cash, Restricted Stock,
additional Deferred Stock or not at all; and
 
(k)           to
determine the terms and conditions pursuant to which an Award may vest on a pro
rata basis or be terminated.
 
The
Committee shall have the authority: to adopt, alter and repeal such rules,
guidelines and practices governing the Plan as it shall, from time to time, deem
advisable; to interpret the terms and provisions of the Plan and any award
issued under the Plan (and any agreements relating thereto); and to otherwise
supervise the administration of the Plan.
 
All
decisions made by the Committee pursuant to the provisions of the Plan shall be
made in the Committee’s sole discretion and shall be final and binding on all
persons, including the Company and Plan participants.  Section 409A of
the Code applies to certain awards under this Plan, and it is intended that all
such awards shall be issued, administered, exercised and paid or transferred in
conformance therewith.  Accordingly, notwithstanding anything in
Article 9 to the contrary, the Committee shall have authority to amend or
restate the terms of a grant or award to preclude violation of section 409A of
the Code, without the consent of the recipient thereof.
 
SECTION
3. Stock
Subject to Plan.
 
The total
number of shares of Stock reserved and available for distribution under the Plan
shall be 42,680,000 shares. Such shares may consist, in whole or in part, of
authorized and unissued shares.
 
If any
shares of Stock that have been optioned cease to be subject to a Stock Option,
or if any such shares of Stock that are subject to any Restricted Stock or
Deferred Stock award granted hereunder are forfeited or any such award otherwise
terminates without a payment being made to the participant in the form of Stock,
such shares shall again be available for distribution in connection with future
awards under the Plan.
 
In the
event of any merger, reorganization, consolidation, recapitalization, stock
dividend, stock split or other change in corporate structure affecting the
Stock, such substitution or adjustment shall be made in the aggregate number of
shares reserved for issuance under the Plan, in the number and option price of
shares subject to outstanding Options granted under the Plan, and in the number
of shares subject to other outstanding awards granted under the Plan as may be
determined to be appropriate by the Committee, in its sole discretion, provided
that the number of shares subject to any award shall always be a whole
number.
 
SECTION
4. Eligibility;
Limitations.
 
All of
the employees of the Company and its Subsidiaries and Affiliates, including all
of those full-time employees in the United States who are “exempt employees,” as
defined under Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, are eligible to receive Awards
under the Plan. At least a majority of the shares of Stock or shares of Stock
underlying Options or other Awards awarded under the Plan during any three-year
period must be awarded to employees who are not officers or directors of the
Company.  No single officer of the Company may acquire under the Plan
more than one percent of the outstanding Stock at the time the Plan is
adopted.
 
SECTION
5. Stock
Options.
 
Stock
Options may be granted alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other awards
granted under the Plan. Any Stock Option granted under the Plan shall be in such
form as the Committee may from time to time approve.
 
Stock
Options granted under the Plan shall not be “incentive stock options” within the
meaning of section 422 of the Code unless the Company obtains the required
shareholder approval of the Plan.
 
Options
granted under the Plan shall be subject to the following terms and conditions
and shall contain such additional terms and conditions, not inconsistent with
the terms of the Plan, as the Committee shall deem desirable:
 
(a)           Option Price.  The
option price per share of Stock purchasable under a Stock Option shall be
determined by the Committee at the time of grant; provided, that such option
price may not be less than the Fair Market Value of the Stock on the date the
Stock Option is granted.
 
(b)           Option Term.  The
term of each Stock Option shall be fixed by the Committee, but no Stock Option
shall be exercisable more than ten (10) years after the date the Option is
granted.
 
(c)           Exercisability.  Stock
Options shall be exercisable at such time or times and subject to such terms and
conditions as shall be determined by the Committee. If the Committee provides,
in its sole discretion, that any Stock Option is exercisable only in
installments, the Committee may waive such installment exercise provisions at
any time in whole or in part, based on such factors as the Committee shall
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
(d)           Method of
Exercise.  Subject to whatever installment exercise provisions
apply under Section 5(c) and subject to whatever restrictions may be imposed by
the Company, Stock Options may be exercised in whole or in part at any time
during the option period, by giving written notice of exercise to the Company
specifying the number of shares to be purchased. Such notice shall be
accompanied by payment in full of the purchase price in such manner and on such
reasonable terms and conditions as the Committee shall establish from time to
time.
 
No shares
of Stock shall be issued upon exercise of a stock option until full payment
therefor has been made. With respect to grants of exercisable options prior to
January 1, 2005, the optionee shall generally have the rights to dividends or
other rights of a shareholder with respect to shares subject to the Option when
the optionee has given written notice of exercise, has paid in full for such
shares, and, if requested, has given the representation described in Section
11(a).  Dividend equivalents or accumulated dividends or other rights
of economic value shall not be issued with Stock Options first becoming
exercisable after December 31, 2004.
 
(e)           Transferability of Options.
Unless the Committee shall permit (on such terms and conditions as it shall
establish) an Option to be transferred to a member of the participant’s
immediate family or to a trust or similar vehicle for the benefit of such
immediate family members, no Option shall be assignable or transferable except
by will or the laws of descent and distribution, and except to the extent
required by law, no right or interest of any participant shall be subject to any
lien, obligation or liability of the participant.
 
(f)           Buyout Provisions. The
Committee may at any time offer to buy out for a payment in cash, Stock,
Deferred Stock or Restricted Stock, an option previously granted hereunder,
based on such terms and conditions as the Committee shall establish and
communicate to the participant at the time that such offer is made; provided
that no such buyout shall be permissible to the extent it would subject the
Option to the requirement of section 409A of the Code or result in a violation
of section 409A of the Code.
 
(g)           Settlement Provisions. With
respect to options exercisable prior to January 1, 2005, if the option agreement
so provides at grant, or is amended after grant, and prior to the exercise, to
so provide (with the optionee’s consent), the Committee may require that all or
part of the shares to be issued with respect to the spread value of an exercised
Option take the form of Deferred or Restricted Stock, which shall be valued on
the date of exercise on the basis of the Fair Market Value (as determined by the
Committee) of such Deferred or Restricted Stock determined without regard to the
deferral limitations and/or the forfeiture restrictions involved.
 
SECTION
6. Restricted
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Shares of
Restricted Stock may be issued either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with,
other awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the Plan. The
Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom, and the time or times at
which, grants of Restricted Stock will be made, the number of shares to be
awarded, the price (if any) to be paid by the recipient of Restricted Stock, the
time or times within which such awards may be subject to forfeiture, and all
other terms and conditions of the awards.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Restricted Stock upon the attainment of
specified performance criteria or such other factors as the Committee may
determine, in its sole discretion.
 
The
provisions of Restricted Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Restricted Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 6 shall be subject
to the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan and the award agreement, during a period set by
the Committee commencing with the date of such award (the “Restriction Period”),
the participant shall not be permitted to sell, transfer, pledge or assign
shares of Restricted Stock awarded under the Plan. Within these limits the
Committee, in its sole discretion, may provide for the lapse of such
restrictions in installments and may accelerate or waive such restrictions in
whole or in part, based on service and/or such other factors as the Committee
may determine, in its sole discretion.
 
(ii)           If
and when the Restriction Period expires without a prior forfeiture of the
Restricted Stock subject to such Restriction Period, certificates for an
appropriate number of unrestricted shares of Stock shall be delivered to the
participant promptly (unless the Committee decides pursuant to Section 2(f) to
settle the award in cash).
 
(iii)           The
voting rights and/or dividend rights, if any, of the Restricted Stock award
shall be established by the Committee pursuant to Section 2(i).
 
SECTION
7. Deferred
Stock.
 
(a)           Administration. Deferred
Stock may be awarded either alone, in addition to, or in tandem with, other
awards granted under the Plan and/or awards made outside of the Plan. The
Committee shall determine the eligible persons to whom and the time or times at
which Deferred Stock shall be awarded, the number of shares of Deferred Stock to
be awarded to any person, the duration of the period (the “Deferral Period”)
during which, and the conditions under which, receipt of the Stock will be
deferred, and the other terms and conditions of the award in addition to those
set forth in Section 7(b).  Awards of Deferred Stock may be subject to
the provisions of section 409A of the Code, and it is intended that any such
grant shall be made and administered in compliance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
The
Committee may condition the grant of Deferred Stock upon the attainment of such
factors or criteria as the Committee shall determine, in its sole
discretion.
 
The
provisions of Deferred Stock awards need not be the same with respect to each
recipient.
 
(b)           Terms and Conditions. The
shares of Deferred Stock awarded pursuant to this Section 7 shall be subject to
the following terms and conditions:
 
(i)           Subject
to the provisions of this Plan, Deferred Stock awards may not be sold, assigned,
transferred, pledged or otherwise encumbered during the Deferral Period. At the
expiration of the Deferral Period (or the elective Deferral Period referred to
in Section 7(b)(iii), where applicable), stock certificates shall be delivered
to the participant, or his legal representative, in a number equal to the shares
covered by the Deferred Stock award (unless the Committee decides pursuant to
Section 2(f) to settle the award in cash).
 
(ii)           The
Committee may accelerate the vesting of all or any part of any Deferred Stock
award and/or waive the deferral limitations in whole or in part, based on
service and/or such other factors as the Committee may determine, in its sole
discretion.
 
(iii)           Deferral
of awards (or any installment thereof) shall not be permitted except in
conformance with Internal Revenue Service transitional guidance under section
409A of the Code that does not result in a violation of section 409A of the
Code, including Internal Revenue Service Notices 2005-1, 2006-67 and
2007-86.
 
(iv)           The
dividend rights, if any, of the Deferred Stock award established by the
Committee pursuant to Section 2(j).  Such rights shall be issued in
conformance with section 409A of the Code.
 
SECTION
8. Change
in Control Provisions.
 
(a)           Impact of Event. The
Committee may provide, at or after the date an Award is granted that,
notwithstanding any provisions of the Plan to the contrary, in the event of a
“Change in Control” (as defined in Section 8(b)) or “Potential Change in
Control” (as defined in section 8(c)):
 
(A)           Any
Stock Options awarded under the Plan not previously exercisable and vested shall
become fully exercisable and vested;
 
(B)           The
restrictions and deferral limitations applicable to any Restricted Stock and
Deferred Stock, in each case to the extent not already vested under the Plan,
shall lapse and such shares and awards shall be deemed fully vested;
and
 
(C)           The
value of all outstanding Awards to the extent vested may at the sole discretion
of the Committee at or after grant but prior to any Change in Control, be cashed
out on the basis of the “Change in Control Price” as defined in Section 8(d) as
of the date such Change in Control or Potential Change in Control is determined
to have occurred or such other date as the Committee may determine prior to the
Change in Control or Potential Change in Control, provided that payment of
awards subject to section 409A of the Code shall be made in a manner compliant
with section 409A.
 
(b)           Definition of “Change in
Control”.  For purposes of Section 8(a), a “Change in Control”
means the happening of any of the following:
 
(i)           When
any “person” as defined in section 3(a)(9) of the Exchange Act and as used in
sections 13(d) and 14(d) thereof, including a “group” as defined in section
13(d) of the Exchange Act but excluding the Company, any Subsidiary or any
employee benefit plan sponsored or maintained by the Company or any Subsidiary
(including any trustee of such plan acting as trustee), directly or indirectly,
becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act,
as amended from time to time), of securities of the Company representing fifteen
percent (15%) or more of the combined voting power of the Company’s then
outstanding securities;
 
(ii)           The
individuals who, as of December 31, 2008, constitute the Board (the “Incumbent
Board”) cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board;
provided, however, that any individual becoming a director subsequent to such
date whose election, or nomination for election by the Company’s shareholders,
was approved by a vote of at least a majority of the directors then comprising
the Incumbent Board shall be considered as though such individual were a member
of the Incumbent Board, but excluding, for this purpose, any such individual
whose initial assumption of office occurs as a result of an actual or threatened
election contest with respect to the election or removal of directors or other
actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or consents by or on behalf of a
person other than the Board; or
 
(iii)           Consummation
of a reorganization, merger or consolidation or sale or other disposition of all
or substantially all of the assets of the Company or the acquisition of assets
of another corporation (a “Business Combination”), in each case, unless,
following such Business Combination: (A) all or substantially all of the
individuals and entities who were the beneficial owners, respectively, of the
then outstanding shares of Stock of the Company and the combined voting power of
the then outstanding voting securities of the Company entitled to vote generally
in the election of directors immediately prior to such Business Combination
beneficially own, directly or indirectly, more than sixty percent (60%) of,
respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock and the combined
voting power of the then outstanding voting securities entitled to vote
generally in the election of directors, as the case may be, of the corporation
resulting from such Business Combination (including, without limitation, a
corporation which as a result of such transaction owns the Company or all or
substantially all of the Company’s assets either directly or through one or more
subsidiaries); (B) no person (excluding any employee benefit plan (or related
trust) of the Company or such corporation resulting from such Business
Combination) beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, fifteen percent (15%) or
more of, respectively, the then outstanding shares of common stock of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination or the combined voting
power of the then outstanding voting securities of such corporation except to
the extent that such ownership existed prior to the Business Combination; and
(C) at least a majority of the members of the board of directors of the
corporation resulting from such Business Combination were members of the
Incumbent Board at the time of the execution of the initial agreement, or of the
action of the Board, providing for such Business Combination; or
 
(iv)           Approval
by the shareholders of the Company of a complete liquidation or dissolution of
the Company.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 8(b) hereinabove, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or change in
effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial portion of the
assets of the Company, in each case as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the
specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii)
or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
(c)           Definition of Potential Change in
Control.  For purposes of Section 8(a), a “Potential Change in
Control” means the happening of any one of the following:
 
(i)           The
approval by shareholders of an agreement by the Company, the consummation of
which would result in a Change in Control of the Company as defined in Section
8(b); or
 
(ii)           The
acquisition of beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any entity,
person or group (other than the Company or a Subsidiary or any Company employee
benefit plan (including any trustee of such plan acting as such trustee)) of
securities of the Company representing five percent (5%) or more of the combined
voting power of the Company’s outstanding securities and the adoption by the
Board of a resolution to the effect that a Potential Change in Control of the
Company has occurred for purposes of this Plan.
 
Notwithstanding
anything in Section 8(c) hereinabove, a Potential Change in Control shall be
deemed to have occurred only if the event is also a change in the ownership, or
change in effective control, or a change in the ownership of a substantial
portion of the assets of the Company, as defined in Treasury Regulation
1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such purpose the
specified percentages in Treasury Regulations 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi) and (vii)
or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any elective
percentage.
 
(d)           Change in Control Price. For
the purposes of this Section 8, “Change in Control Price” means the highest
price per share paid in any transaction reported on the New York Stock Exchange
Composite Index, or paid or offered in any bona fide transaction related to a
potential or actual Change in Control of the Company at any time during the
sixty (60) day period immediately preceding the occurrence of the Change in
Control, in each case as determined by the Committee.
 
SECTION
9. Amendments
and Termination.
 
The Board
may amend, alter or discontinue the Plan, but no amendment, alteration or
discontinuation shall be made which would impair the rights of an optionee or
participant under an Award theretofore granted, without the optionee’s or
participant’s consent.
 
The
Committee may amend the terms of any Stock Option or other award theretofore
granted, prospectively or retroactively, but subject to Section 3 above, no such
amendment shall impair the rights of any holder without the holder’s
consent.
 
Subject
to the above provisions, the Board shall have broad authority to amend the Plan
to take into account changes in applicable securities and tax laws and
accounting rules, as well as other developments.
 
Notwithstanding
the above, no amendment shall be made that shall constitute an impermissible
acceleration of an award that is subject to section 409A of the Code and awards
subject to section 409A of the Code may be amended without participant consent
to the extent provided in Section 2 of this Plan.
 
SECTION
10. Unfunded
Status of Plan.
 
The Plan
is intended to constitute an “unfunded” plan for incentive and deferred
compensation. With respect to any payments not yet made to a participant or
optionee by the Company, nothing contained herein shall give any such
participant or optionee any rights that are greater than those of a general
creditor of the Company. In its sole discretion, the Committee may authorize the
creation of trusts or other arrangements to meet the obligations created under
the Plan to deliver Stock or payments in lieu of or with respect to awards
hereunder; provided, however, that unless the Committee otherwise determines
with the consent of the affected participant, the existence of such trusts or
other arrangements is consistent with the “unfunded” status of the
Plan.  Trusts or other arrangements so established shall be subject to
the limitations of section 409A(b) of the Code.
 
SECTION
11. General
Provisions.
 
(a)           The
Committee may require each person purchasing shares pursuant to a Stock Option
or other award under the Plan to represent to and agree with the Company in
writing that the optionee or participant is acquiring the shares without a view
to distribution thereof. The certificates for such shares may include any legend
that the Committee deems appropriate to reflect any restrictions on
transfer.
 
All
certificates for shares of Stock or other securities delivered under the Plan
shall be subject to such stock-transfer orders and other restrictions as the
Committee may deem advisable under the rules, regulations, and other
requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission, any stock exchange upon
which the Stock is then listed, and any applicable federal or state securities
law, and the Committee may cause a legend or legends to be put on any such
certificates to make appropriate reference to such restrictions.
 
(b)           Nothing
contained in this Plan shall prevent the Board from adopting other or additional
compensation arrangements, subject to stockholder approval if such approval is
required, and such arrangements may be either generally applicable or applicable
only in specific cases.
 
(c)           The
adoption of the Plan shall not confer upon any employee of the Company or any
Subsidiary or Affiliate any right to continued employment with the Company or a
Subsidiary or Affiliate, as the case may be, nor shall it interfere in any way
with the right of the Company or a Subsidiary or Affiliate to terminate the
employment of any of its employees at any time.
 
(d)           Except
as the participant and the Company may otherwise agree, no later than the date
as of which an amount first becomes includible in the gross income of the
participant for federal income tax purposes with respect to any award under the
Plan, the participant shall pay to the Company, or make arrangements
satisfactory to the Committee regarding the payment of, any federal, state, or
local taxes of any kind required by law to be withheld with respect to such
amount. Unless otherwise determined by the Committee, withholding obligations
may be settled with Stock, including Stock that is part of the award that gives
rise to the withholding requirement. The obligations of the Company under the
Plan shall be conditional on such payment or arrangements, and the Company and
its Subsidiaries or Affiliates shall, to the extent permitted by law, have the
right to deduct any such taxes from any payment of any kind otherwise due to the
participant.
 
(e)           The
actual or deemed reinvestment of dividends or dividend equivalents in additional
Restricted Stock (or in Deferred Stock or other types of Plan awards) at the
time of any dividend payment shall only be permissible if sufficient shares of
Stock are available under Section 3 for such reinvestment (taking into account
then outstanding Stock Options and other Plan awards).
 
(f)           The
Committee may permit a participant to postpone the delivery of Stock under any
award, including a Stock Option, under the Plan upon such terms and conditions
as the Committee shall determine, but, with respect to awards subject to section
409A of the Code, only in conformance with section 409A of the
Code.
 
(g)           The
Plan and all awards made and actions taken thereunder shall be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware.
 
(h)           The
recipient of an Award hereunder is responsible for ensuring that all applicable
taxes are paid when due. The Corporation and any Subsidiary or Affiliate reserve
the right to sell all or any part of an Award and apply the proceeds to the tax
obligation, or to withhold an amount equal to such tax obligation from the
recipient’s salary, wages or any other payments made to the recipient by a
Subsidiary or Affiliate.
 
SECTION
12. Effective
Date of Plan.
 
As
amended and restated, the Plan shall be effective as of March 18, 2003, with
changes effected hereunder effective as of January 1, 2005.
 
SECTION
13. Term of Plan.
 
No Award
shall be granted pursuant to the Plan on or after the tenth anniversary of the
date of adoption of the Plan, but awards granted prior to such tenth anniversary
may extend beyond that date, in accordance with the terms of such
awards.
 



EX-10.151
63
ex10151.htm
EMPLOYEE STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex10151.htm







FIRST
AMENDMENT
 
TO
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
1994
DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
 
THIS
FIRST AMENDMENT TO AMR CORPORATION 1994 DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, is made
this 17th day of
November, 2008, by AMR Corporation (the “Company”).
 
PREAMBLE
 
The
Company established the AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, as
amended (the “Plan”) to enable the Company to attract, retain and motivate the
best qualified directors and to enhance a long-term mutuality of interest
between the directors and stockholders of the Company by providing the directors
with a direct economic interest in the Common Stock of the
Company.  Since the adoption of the Plan, section 409A of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), has been enacted and requires
amendment of the Plan.  Such required amendments are accomplished by
adoption of this instrument, which is effective as of January 1,
2005.  Except as amended by this instrument, the Plan shall remain in
full force and effect.
 
AMENDMENTS
 
1.           Section
2(e) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in ownership of the Company, or
change in effective control of the Company, or change in ownership of a
substantial portion of the Company’s assets, in each case as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such
purpose the specified percentages in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi)
and (vii) or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any
elective percentage.  The determination of the occurrence of a Change
in Control shall be made by the Board, consistent with the definition of such
term as contained in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
2.           Section
2(k) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, the term “Disability” shall mean
“Disability” as defined in section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.  Determination of Disability shall be made by the
Board consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor
guidance thereto.”
 
3.           Section
9(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“With
respect to any Deferred Share not vested as of December 31, 2004, such Deferred
Share may not be distributed until the later of any date specified above or a
date that is within thirty (30) days after the Eligible Director has a
“separation from service” within the meaning of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h)
or successor guidance thereto.”
 
4.           Section
9(c) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“This
Section 9(c) is inapplicable to any Deferred Share not vested on or before
December 31, 2004.”
 
5.           Section
13(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“Any
distribution on termination of the Plan shall be made only in a manner permitted
by Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix).”
 
This
First Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, and is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           Corporate
Secretary








EX-10.152
64
ex10152.htm
DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, AMENDED

ex10152.htm






 



 






 



FIRST
AMENDMENT
 
TO
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
1994
DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
 
THIS
FIRST AMENDMENT TO AMR CORPORATION 1994 DIRECTORS STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN, is made
this 17th day of
November, 2008, by AMR Corporation (the “Company”).
 
PREAMBLE
 
The
Company established the AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan, as
amended (the “Plan”) to enable the Company to attract, retain and motivate the
best qualified directors and to enhance a long-term mutuality of interest
between the directors and stockholders of the Company by providing the directors
with a direct economic interest in the Common Stock of the
Company.  Since the adoption of the Plan, section 409A of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), has been enacted and requires
amendment of the Plan.  Such required amendments are accomplished by
adoption of this instrument, which is effective as of January 1,
2005.  Except as amended by this instrument, the Plan shall remain in
full force and effect.
 
AMENDMENTS
 
1.           Section
2(e) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, a Change in Control shall be deemed to
have occurred only if the event is also a change in ownership of the Company, or
change in effective control of the Company, or change in ownership of a
substantial portion of the Company’s assets, in each case as defined in Treasury
Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance thereto.  For such
purpose the specified percentages in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5)(v), (vi)
and (vii) or successor guidance thereto shall be utilized, rather than any
elective percentage.  The determination of the occurrence of a Change
in Control shall be made by the Board, consistent with the definition of such
term as contained in Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(5) or successor guidance
thereto.”
 
2.           Section
2(k) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following language, at
the end thereof:
 
“Notwithstanding
the foregoing, with respect to any Deferred Share not vested under the terms of
this Plan on or before December 31, 2004, the term “Disability” shall mean
“Disability” as defined in section 409A(a)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.  Determination of Disability shall be made by the
Board consistently with Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(i)(4)(i) or successor
guidance thereto.”
 
3.           Section
9(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“With
respect to any Deferred Share not vested as of December 31, 2004, such Deferred
Share may not be distributed until the later of any date specified above or a
date that is within thirty (30) days after the Eligible Director has a
“separation from service” within the meaning of Treasury Regulation 1.409A-1(h)
or successor guidance thereto.”
 
4.           Section
9(c) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence, at
the end thereof:
 
“This
Section 9(c) is inapplicable to any Deferred Share not vested on or before
December 31, 2004.”
 
5.           Section
13(a) of the Plan is hereby amended by the addition of the following sentence,
at the end thereof:
 
“Any
distribution on termination of the Plan shall be made only in a manner permitted
by Treasury Regulation 1.409A-3(j)(4)(ix).”
 
This
First Amendment to AMR Corporation 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan is
executed this 17th day of November, 2008, and is effective as of January 1,
2005.
 
AMR
CORPORATION
 
By:           
Its:           Corporate
Secretary













P:\069878\Director
Compensation Plans\Amended 1994 Directors Stock Incentive Plan Final
111708.doc
 



 



 






 






EX-12
65
ex12.htm
COMPUTATION OF RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES

ex12.htm







Exhibit
12

AMR
CORPORATION
Computation
of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
 (in
millions)








 
      
 

2008

 
 

2007

 
 

2006

 
 

2005

 
 

2004

 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Earnings:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Income
      (loss) before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting
      change

 
$
(2,071
)
 
$
 504
 
 
$
 231
 
 
$
(857
)
 
$
(751
)


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Add:  Total
      fixed charges (per below)

 
 
1,631
 
 
 
1,828
 
 
 
1,945
 
 
 
1,846
 
 
 
1,755
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Less:  Interest
      capitalized

 
 
33
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
29
 
 
 
65
 
 
 
80
 



Total
      earnings (loss)

 
$
(473
)
 
$
2,312
 
 
$
2,147
 
 
$
924
 
 
$
924
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Fixed
      charges:

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Interest

 
$
703
 
 
$
857
 
 
$
969
 
 
$
897
 
 
$
822
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Portion
      of rental expense representative of the interest factor

 
 
847
 
 
 
898
 
 
 
898
 
 
 
876
 
 
 
869
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Amortization
      of debt expense

 
 
81
 
 
 
73
 
 
 
78
 
 
 
73
 
 
 
64
 



Total
      fixed charges

 
$
1,631
 
 
$
1,828
 
 
$
1,945
 
 
$
1,846
 
 
$
1,755
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Ratio
      of earnings to fixed charges

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.26
 
 
 
1.10
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
-
 


 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Coverage
      deficiency

 
$
2,104
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
-
 
 
$
922
 
 
$
831
 












EX-21
66
ex21.htm
SUBSIDIARIES

ex21.htm





                             
Exhibit
21        
AMR
CORPORATION
SUBSIDIARIES
OF THE REGISTRANT
As
of December 31, 2008
 
Subsidiary
companies of the Registrant are listed below.  With respect to the
companies named, all voting securities are owned directly or indirectly by the
Registrant, except where otherwise indicated.
 
              State or
     Sovereign
Power 
Name of
Subsidiary                                          of
Incorporation
 
Subsidiaries
included in the Registrant’s consolidated financial statements
 




American
      Airlines, Inc.
AA 2002 Class C Certificate
      Corporation
AA 2002 Class D Certificate
      Corporation I
AA 2003-1 Class C Certificate
      Corporation
AA 2003-1 Class D Certificate
      Corporation
AA 2004-1 Class B Note
      Corporation
AA 2005-1 Class C Certificate
      Corporation
AA Real Estate Holding GP
      LLC
AA Real Estate Holding
      L.P.
Admirals Club, Inc.
      (Massachusetts only)
American Airlines de Mexico,
      S.A.
American Airlines de Venezuela,
      S.A.
American Airlines Marketing
      Services LLC
American Airlines Realty (NYC)
      Holdings, Inc.
American Airlines Vacations
      LLC
American Aviation Supply
      LLC
Packcall Limited
Texas Aero Engine Services,
      L.L.C, dba TAESL*


Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Massachusetts
Mexico
Venezuela
Virginia
New
      York
Delaware
Delaware
United
      Kingdom
Delaware




Americas
      Ground Services, Inc.
Aerodespachos Colombia, S.A.
      AERCOL S.A.
Caribbean Dispatch Services,
      Ltd.
American Airlines, Division de
      Servicios Aeroportuarios (R.D.), S.A.(DSA)
International Ground Services,
      S.A. de C.V.


Delaware
Colombia
St.
      Lucia
Dominican
      Republic
Mexico




AMR
      Eagle Holding Corporation
American Eagle Airlines,
      Inc.
Eagle Aviation Services,
      Inc.
Executive Airlines,
      Inc.


Delaware
Delaware
Delaware
Delaware




Avion
      Assurance Ltd.


Bermuda




PMA
      Investment Subsidiary, Inc.
SC
      Investment, Inc.


Delaware
Delaware





  *Entities
with 50% or less ownership.



EX-23
67
ex23.htm
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUTING FIRM

ex23.htm







 
Exhibit 23      



CONSENT
OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM


We
consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statements (Form S-8
No. 2-68366, Form S-8 No. 333-19325, Form S-8 No. 33-27866, Form S-8 No.
33-60725, Form S-8 No. 333-13751, Form S-8 No. 33-60727, Form S-8 No. 333-56947,
Form S-8 No. 333-70239, Form S-8 No. 333-104611, Form S-3 No. 33-46325, Form S-3
No. 33-52121, Form S-3 No. 333-68211, Form S-3 No. 333-84292-01, Form S-3 No.
333-110760 and Form S-3 No. 333-136563-01) of AMR Corporation, and in the
related Prospectuses, of our reports dated February 18, 2009, with respect to
the consolidated financial statements and schedule of AMR Corporation and the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting of AMR
Corporation,  included in this Annual Report (Form  10-K)
for the year ended December 31, 2008.






/s/  ERNST & YOUNG
LLP


Dallas,
Texas
February
18, 2009







EX-31.1
68
ex311.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER

ex311.htm







                  
Exhibit
31.1      


I, Gerard
J. Arpey, certify that:





1.  


I
      have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of AMR
      Corporation;









2.  


Based
      on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a
      material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
      statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements
      were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
      report;









3.  


Based
      on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information
      included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
      financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
      registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this
      report;









4.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for
      establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
      defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal
      control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
      13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
  have:









(a)  


Designed
      such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure
      controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
      that material information relating to the registrant, including its
      consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
      entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being
      prepared;









(b)  


Designed
      such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal
      control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
      provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
      reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
      purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
      principles;









(c)  


Evaluated
      the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures
      and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
      the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period
      covered by this report based on such evaluation;
  and









(d)  


Disclosed
      in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over
      financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
      fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
      annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
      materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial
      reporting; and









5.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on
      our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
      to the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's
      board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
      functions):









(a)  


All
      significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
      operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
      reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record,
      process, summarize and report financial information;
  and









(b)  


Any
      fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
      employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
      over financial reporting.







Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Gerard J.
Arpey                                                   
Gerard J. Arpey
Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer



EX-31.2
69
ex312.htm
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER

ex312.htm







                         
Exhibit
31.2       


I, Thomas
W. Horton, certify that:





1.  


I
      have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of AMR
      Corporation;









2.  


Based
      on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a
      material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
      statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements
      were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
      report;









3.  


Based
      on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information
      included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
      financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
      registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this
      report;









4.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for
      establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as
      defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal
      control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules
      13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
  have:









(a)  


Designed
      such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure
      controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure
      that material information relating to the registrant, including its
      consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
      entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being
      prepared;









(b)  


Designed
      such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal
      control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
      provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
      reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
      purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
      principles;









(c)  


Evaluated
      the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures
      and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
      the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period
      covered by this report based on such evaluation;
  and









(d)  


Disclosed
      in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over
      financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent
      fiscal quarter (the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an
      annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
      materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial
      reporting; and









5.  


The
      registrant's other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on
      our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
      to the registrant's auditors and the audit committee of the registrant's
      board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent
      functions):









(a)  


All
      significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
      operation of internal control over financial reporting which are
      reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant's ability to record,
      process, summarize and report financial information;
  and









(b)  


Any
      fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
      employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control
      over financial reporting.







Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Thomas W.
Horton
Thomas W. Horton
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer



EX-32
70
ex32.htm
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 906

ex32.htm







 
Exhibit
32     

AMR
CORPORATION
Certification
Pursuant
to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
(Subsections
(a) and (b) of Section 1350, Chapter 63 of Title 18, United States
Code)


Pursuant
to section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of
section 1350, chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code), each of the
undersigned officers of AMR Corporation, a Delaware corporation (the Company),
does hereby certify, to such officer’s knowledge, that:

The
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (the Form 10-K)
of the Company fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and information contained in the Form 10-K
fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results
of operations of the Company.

Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Gerard J.
Arpey                                                              
Gerard J. Arpey
Chairman, President and Chief
Executive Officer

Date:  February
18,
2009                                                   /s/ Thomas W.
Horton
Thomas W. Horton
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer



The
foregoing certification is being furnished solely pursuant to section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (subsections (a) and (b) of section 1350, chapter 63
of title 18, United States Code) and is not being filed as part of the Form 10-K
or as a separate disclosure document.



-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
