-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 CxSqXXsMIzmA3cBNlR6YOdjK/sBGH5GdtVlm8hX7v8rZD4RUF5OJba55LoCLSBzp
 BiCj9FqUSDoBZA2J3+j++Q==

0001047469-03-041604.txt : 20031219
0001047469-03-041604.hdr.sgml : 20031219
20031219172545
ACCESSION NUMBER:		0001047469-03-041604
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:	10-K
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:		8
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:	20030927
FILED AS OF DATE:		20031219

FILER:

	COMPANY DATA:	
		COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:			APPLE COMPUTER INC
		CENTRAL INDEX KEY:			0000320193
		STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION:	ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS [3571]
		IRS NUMBER:				942404110
		STATE OF INCORPORATION:			CA
		FISCAL YEAR END:			0930

	FILING VALUES:
		FORM TYPE:		10-K
		SEC ACT:		1934 Act
		SEC FILE NUMBER:	000-10030
		FILM NUMBER:		031066037

	BUSINESS ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		1 INFINITE LOOP
		CITY:			CUPERTINO
		STATE:			CA
		ZIP:			95014
		BUSINESS PHONE:		4089961010

	MAIL ADDRESS:	
		STREET 1:		ONE INFINITE LOOP
		CITY:			CUPERTINO
		STATE:			CA
		ZIP:			95014


10-K
1
a2124888z10-k.htm
10-K


QuickLinks
 -- Click here to rapidly navigate through this document


UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549  

Form 10-K  
(Mark One)  



ý
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934



For the fiscal year ended September 27, 2003  
 OR  



o
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934



For the transition period from                               to
                              
 Commission file number 0-10030

APPLE COMPUTER, INC.(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 



CALIFORNIA
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation or organization)
 
942404110
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)


1 Infinite Loop
Cupertino, California
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
95014
(Zip Code)



Registrant's
telephone number, including area code: (408) 996-1010  
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: None 
Securities
registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, no par value
(Titles of classes) 

Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past
90 days. Yes ý    No o 
Indicate
by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (section 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be
contained, to the best of the registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference to Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment
to this Form 10-K.    o 
Indicate
by check mark whether the registrant is an accelerated filer (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act). Yes ý    No o 
The
aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant, as of March 29, 2003, was approximately $4,479,669,616 based upon
the closing price reported for such date on the NASDAQ National Market. For purposes of this disclosure, shares of Common Stock held by persons who hold more than 5% of the outstanding shares of
Common Stock and shares held by executive officers and directors of the registrant have been excluded because such persons may be deemed to be affiliates. This determination of executive officer or
affiliate status is not necessarily a conclusive determination for other purposes. 
367,734,960
shares of Common Stock Issued and Outstanding as of December 5, 2003 





  

 
 
PART I     
The Business section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K ("Form 10-K") contain forward-looking
statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Many of the forward-looking statements are located in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as "anticipates," "expects," "believes," "plans," "predicts," and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future
performance and the Company's actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not
limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition" under Part II, Item 7 of this Form 10-K. The Company
assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law.
 
 
Item 1. Business     
Company Background  
Apple Computer, Inc. ("Apple" or the "Company") was incorporated under the laws of the State of California on January 3, 1977. The Company designs, manufactures
and markets personal computers and related software, peripherals and personal computing and communicating solutions. The Company's products include the Macintosh® line of desktop and
notebook computers, the Mac OS® X operating system, the iPod™ digital music player, and a portfolio of software and peripheral products for education, creative, consumer and
business customers. The Company sells its products through its online stores, direct sales force, third-party wholesalers and resellers, and its own retail stores. The Company's fiscal year ends on
the last Saturday of September. Unless otherwise stated, all information presented in this Form 10-K is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. 
Business Strategy  
Digital Hub  
Apple is committed to bringing the best possible personal computing experience to students, educators, creative professionals, businesses and consumers around the world through
its innovative hardware, software, peripherals and Internet offerings, including .Mac™ and the iTunes® Music Store™. The Company believes that personal computing
has entered a new era in which the personal computer functions for both professionals and consumers as the digital hub for advanced new digital devices such as the Company's iPod digital music
players, personal digital assistants, cellular phones, digital still and movie cameras, CD and DVD players, and other electronic devices. The attributes of the personal computer, including its ability
to run complex applications, possess a high quality user interface, contain large and relatively inexpensive storage, and easily connect to the Internet in multiple ways and at varying speeds, can
individually add value to these devices and interconnect them as well. Apple is the only company in the personal computer industry that designs and manufactures the entire personal
computer—from the hardware and operating system to sophisticated applications. Apple provides innovative industrial design, intuitive ease-of-use, and
built-in networking, graphics, and multimedia capabilities. Thus, the Company is uniquely positioned to offer digital hub products and solutions. 
Apple
develops products and technologies that adhere to many industry standards in order to provide an optimized user experience through interoperability with peripherals and devices from other
companies. Apple has played a role in the development, enhancement, promotion, and/or use of numerous of these industry standards, many of which are discussed below. 
Retail  
Since inception of its retail initiative in 2001, the Company has opened 65 retail stores in the United States through fiscal year 2003 and during the first quarter of 2004
opened 9 additional stores, including its first international store in the Ginza in Tokyo, Japan. The Company has located its stores at high traffic 
1


 
locations
in quality shopping malls and urban shopping districts. In addition to its own hardware, software and peripheral products, the Company's stores carry a variety of third-party hardware and
software products. 
One
of the main goals of the retail initiative is to bring new customers to the Company and expand its installed base through sales to both first time personal computer buyers and those switching to
the Macintosh platform from competing operating system platforms. By operating its own stores, the Company is able to better control the customer retail experience. The stores are designed to simplify
and enhance the presentation and marketing of personal computing products. To that end, retail store configurations have expanded to various sizes in order to accommodate market demands. The stores
employ experienced and knowledgeable personnel, provide post-sale advice and support, offer a wide selection of third-party products selected to complement the Company's own products, host
training and marketing presentations, and provide certain hardware support services. Additionally, the stores provide a forum in which the Company is able to present entire computing solutions to
users in areas such as digital photography, digital video, music, children's software, and home and small business computing. 
Education  
For more than 25 years, the Company has focused on the use of technology in education. The Company believes that effective integration of technology into classroom
instruction can result in higher levels of student achievement, especially when used to support collaboration, information access, and the expression and representation of student thought and ideas.
The Company provides a range of products and services designed to help schools maximize their investments in technology. This is manifested in many of the Company's products and services, including
hardware products like the eMac™ and the iBook® that are designed to meet the needs of education customers, video editing solutions, wireless networking capabilities, student
information systems, one-to-one learning solutions, and high-quality curriculum and professional development solutions. 
Creative Professionals  
Creative professionals constitute one of the Company's most important markets for both hardware and software products. This market is also important to many third-party
developers who provide Macintosh compatible hardware and software solutions. Creative customers utilize the Company's products for a variety of creative activities including digital video and film
production and editing; digital video and film special effects, compositing, and titling; digital still photography; graphic design, publishing, and print production; music performance and production;
audio production and sound design; and web design, development, and administration. 
The
Company designs its high-end hardware solutions, including servers and desktop and portable Macintosh systems, to incorporate the power, expandability, and features desired by creative
professionals. Additionally, the Company's operating system, Mac OS X, incorporates powerful graphics and audio technologies and features developer tools to optimize system and application performance
when running powerful creative solutions provided by the Company or by third-party developers. The Company also offers various software solutions to meet the needs of its creative customers, many of
which are described below. 
Business Organization  
The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company's reportable operating segments are the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The Americas segment
includes both North and South America, except for the activities of the Company's Retail segment. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Japan
segment includes only Japan, except for the activities of the Company's Retail segment. The Retail segment currently operates Apple-owned retail stores in the United States and in the first quarter of
fiscal 2004, opened its first international store in Tokyo, Japan. Other operating segments include Asia-Pacific, which includes Australia and Asia except for 
2


 
Japan,
and the Company's subsidiary, FileMaker, Inc. Each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services. Further information regarding the
Company's operating segments may be found in Part II, Item 7 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Segment Operating Performance," and in Part II, Item 8 on this
Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 11, "Segment Information and Geographic Data." 
Hardware Products  
The Company offers a range of personal computing products including desktop and notebook personal computers, related devices and peripherals, networking and connectivity
products, and various third-party hardware products. All of the Company's Macintosh products utilize PowerPC® RISC-based microprocessors. The Company's entire line of Macintosh
systems, excluding servers, features the Company's suite of software for digital photography, music, and movies. 
Power Mac®  
The Power Mac line of desktop personal computers is targeted at business and professional users and is designed to meet the speed, expansion and networking needs of the most
demanding Macintosh user. Powered by the PowerPC G5 processor, designed by IBM and Apple, and featuring up to a 1 GHz front-side bus and the ability to address up to 8GB of memory, the
current Power Mac G5 utilizes 64-bit processing technology for advanced 64-bit computation, while running existing 32-bit applications natively. The PowerPC G5
processor architecture is based on a completely new execution core that features massively parallel computation, full symmetric multi-processing, two double precision floating point units and an
optimized Velocity Engine™. Power Mac G5 systems, encased in a professional aluminum enclosure with computer controlled cooling for quiet operation, also include on all models SuperDrive
CD-RW/DVD-R drives, digital audio and PCI-X expansion, and advanced input and output technologies including Gigabit Ethernet, FireWire® and USB ports.
The system also supports 54 Mbps AirPort Extreme® wireless networking and is Bluetooth ready for wireless connections to a host of Bluetooth-enabled peripherals. Prior to the availability
of the Power Mac G5 in August 2003, the
Company's Power Mac line during most of fiscal 2003 featured PowerPC G4 processors in all models. The Company continues to offer a Power Macintosh G4 system with a single or dual 1.25 Ghz processor
configuration. 
Xserve® and Xserve RAID Storage System  
Xserve, the Company's first ever rack-mount server product, was designed for simple setup and remote management of intensive input/output (I/O) applications such as
digital video, high-resolution digital imagery, and large databases. In February 2003, the Company upgraded its Xserve 1U rack servers with more powerful processors, more storage
capacity, and a FireWire 800 interface. At the same time, the Company introduced the Xserve RAID Storage System, a rack storage system that holds up to 14 hot-swapable drive modules
capable of holding up to 3.5 terabytes of data. Xserve RAID architecture combines affordable, high-capacity ATA/100 drive technology with a Fibre Channel interface for reliable and fast
data access. Xserve RAID provides RAID level 5 throughput that supports affordable real-time high definition (HD) 1080i video editing. 
PowerBook® 
The
PowerBook family of portable computers is designed to meet the mobile computing needs of professionals and advanced consumer users. The 17-inch PowerBook G4 features a
17-inch wide-format active-matrix display, is encased in a durable aluminum alloy enclosure, is 1-inch thick, and weighs as little as 6.9 pounds. The
17-inch PowerBook G4 also features built-in support for AirPort Extreme 54 Mbps 802.11g wireless networking, new high-speed FireWire 800, a backlit keyboard with
ambient light sensors, and built-in Bluetooth for wireless connection to cell phones and other Bluetooth equipped peripherals. The 12-inch PowerBook G4 features a
12-inch, active-matrix display housed in a lightweight, durable aluminum alloy enclosure weighing approximately 4.6 pounds. The 12-inch PowerBook G4 features a
high-speed PowerPC G4 processor, NVIDIA graphics, built-in Bluetooth wireless networking, and battery 
3


 
life
of up to five hours on a single charge. In September 2003, the Company introduced a new 15-inch PowerBook G4, which features a 15.2-inch widescreen display,
and is encased in a sleek aluminum design weighing as little as 5.6 pounds. This product line addition complements the Company's other two PowerBook models, the 12-inch and
17-inch PowerBook G4s that were introduced in January 2003 and updated in September 2003. 
iMac®  
The iMac line of desktop computers is targeted to education and consumer markets. The Company's iMac product line features an innovative industrial design that incorporates an
adjustable 15-inch or 17-inch thin film transistor (TFT) active-matrix flat panel display and an ultra-compact base. In November 2003, a new 20-inch iMac
model was released. All models utilize PowerPC G4 processors, fast 333 MHz DDR memory, NVIDIA graphics, two FireWire 400 and three high-speed USB 2.0 ports. The iMac also offers the latest
in wireless communications with support for 54 Mbps AirPort Extreme and Bluetooth wireless connectivity. 
eMac™  
The eMac, which is targeted primarily at the Company's education and consumer customers, features a PowerPC G4 processor, a high resolution 17-inch flat cathode ray
tube (CRT) display, a SuperDrive option, and preserves the all-in-one compact design of the original iMac favored by many of the Company's education and consumer customers. 
iBook® 
The
iBook is designed to meet the portable computing needs of education and consumer users. The current iBooks, upgraded in October 2003, feature PowerPC G4 processors and either a
12-inch or 14-inch display. These systems offer advanced connectivity with AirPort Extreme and Bluetooth, and certain models include 256 MB of DDR memory and
slot-load Combo drives for burning CDs and watching DVDs. Each iBook is outfitted with a sleek polycarbonate plastic enclosure and weighs as little as 4.9 pounds. 
Peripheral Products  
The Company sells certain associated Apple-branded computer hardware peripherals, including iPod™ digital music players, iSight™ digital video cameras,
and a range of high quality flat panel TFT active-matrix digital color displays. The Company also sells a variety of third-party Macintosh compatible hardware products directly to end users through
both its retail and online stores, including computer printers and printing supplies, storage devices, computer memory, digital video and still cameras, personal digital assistants, and various other
computing products and supplies. 
iPod™  
The Company's newest iPod portable music player, compatible with both the Macintosh and Windows platforms, is smaller and lighter than previous versions and is available in
three models with storage capacity of either 10GB, 20GB, or 40GB; the latter holding up to 10,000 songs. In addition to MP3, iPod now supports the Advanced Audio Coding (AAC) audio format. The new
iPod models also feature solid-state interfaces and the 20GB and 40GB models include the iPod Dock, which facilitates fast and easy connection to a computer or stereo. The iPod's functionality extends
well beyond playing music. Other key capabilities include data storage, calendar and contact information utility, and a selection of games. With the addition of third-party iPod peripherals, the
capabilities of certain iPods can be enhanced to include voice recording and photo downloading from certain digital cameras. Along with the iPod, the Company has developed a seamless
end-to-end music solution with the Company's iTunes® digital music management software and the iTunes Music Store, a service that consumers may use to purchase
music over the Internet. Further discussion on these related music offerings may be found below under the headings "Software Products and Computer Technologies" and "Internet Software, Integration,
and Services." 
4


 
iSight™  
The Company introduced the iSight digital video camera and the beta version of its iChat™ AV software application in June 2003. Together they enable
high-quality audio and videoconferences between two Macintosh systems over broadband connections. iSight is a small, portable aluminum alloy camera with all audio, video and power provided
by a single FireWire cable. iSight features a custom designed lens with auto-focus and a high-end CCD sensor to provide high-resolution images and
full-motion video at up to 30 frames per second. iSight includes an integrated microphone that suppresses ambient noise for clear digital audio. With its on-board processor,
iSight automatically adjusts color, white balance, sharpness and contrast to provide high-quality images with accurate color reproduction in most lighting conditions. iSight is designed to
be center-mounted on the top of a computer screen and uses its integrated tilt and rotate mechanism to easily position the camera for natural, face-to-face video conferencing. 
Displays  
The Company's all-digital, active-matrix LCD flat panel displays, including the 23-inch Cinema HD Display®, 20-inch Apple Cinema
Display® and the 17-inch Apple Studio Display®, produce flicker-free images with twice the brightness, sharpness, and contrast ratio of a typical CRT
display. 
Software Products and Computer Technologies  
The Company offers a range of software products for education, creative, consumer and business customers, including Mac OS X, the Company's proprietary operating system
software for the Macintosh; server software and related solutions; professional application software; and consumer, education and business oriented application software. 
Operating System Software  
During 2001, the Company introduced the first customer release of its new client operating system, Mac OS X, and its first significant upgrade, Mac OS X version 10.1. At its
introduction, Mac OS X offered advanced functionality built on an open-source UNIX-based foundation and incorporated the most fundamental changes in both core technology and
user interface design made by the Company to the Mac OS in a single upgrade since the original introduction of the Macintosh in 1984. Mac OS X features memory protection, pre-emptive
multi-tasking, and symmetric multiprocessing. Mac OS X includes Apple's Quartz™® 2D graphics engine (based on the Internet-standard Portable Document Format) for enhanced
graphics and broad font support, OpenGL for enhanced 3D graphics and gaming, and Apple's new user interface named "Aqua®," which combines
superior ease-of-use with new functionality. In January 2002, the Company made Mac OS X the default operating system on all new Macintosh systems. 
In
August 2002, the Company introduced Mac OS X version 10.2 (code named "Jaguar"), the second significant upgrade to the original Mac OS X version. Jaguar included a new Mail application
designed to manage junk mail; iChat, an AIM-compatible instant messenger; a system-wide Address Book; Inkwell™ handwriting recognition; improved Universal Access;
an enhanced Finder™; an updated version of QuickTime®, the Company's multimedia software for playing, interacting with or viewing video, audio, and graphics files; and an
updated version of Sherlock®, the Company's advanced Internet search engine. Jaguar also featured accelerated graphics performance, increased compatibility with Windows networks, and a
UNIX-based foundation with enhancements including FreeBSD 4.4 and GCC 3.1-based developer tools. 
In
October 2003, the Company released Mac OS X version 10.3 (code named "Panther"), the Company's current version of Mac OS X. Panther incorporates more than 150 new features including a
completely new Finder™; Exposé, a new way to organize windows and instantly see all open windows at once; FileVault™, a new feature that secures the contents of
a home directory with 128-bit AES encryption; iChat AV, a complete desktop video conferencing solution; and enhanced support for use on Windows-based networks. 
5


 

Server Software and Server Solutions  
Mac OS X server software was initially introduced in May 2001, followed by Mac OS X Server version 10.2 (code named "Jaguar Server") that was released in
August 2002. Jaguar Server delivers high-performance services for Internet and web serving, filing, printing, and networking services needed to manage a network of Mac, UNIX, and
Windows clients. It provides performance and stability through full pre-emptive multi-tasking, symmetric multiprocessing, protected memory, advanced virtual memory, software RAID support,
and support for networking and security standards. Jaguar Server also includes Apple's Open Directory architecture for centralized management of network resources using LDAPv3 directory services and a
suite of built-in, standards-based Internet services like an optimized Apache web server for high-performance hosting of secure dynamic web sites and QuickTime Streaming Server
and QuickTime Broadcaster for streaming live events over the Internet. Jaguar Server also comes with a flexible mail server that supports POP and secure IMAP, as well as WebMail for browser-based
email access. 
In
October 2003, the Company began shipping the current version of its server operating system, which is called Mac OS X Server version 10.3 "Panther Server." This release integrates leading
open source and open standards server software with easy-to-use management tools that make it easy to serve Macintosh, Windows and Linux clients. Panther Server includes
powerful open source solutions and easy-to-use server management capabilities. New features in Panther Server include Server Admin tool for easily setting up multiple servers;
Open Directory 2 for hosting scalable LDAP directory and Kerberos authentication services; Samba 3 for providing login and home directory support for Windows clients; and the JBoss application server
for running powerful J2EE applications. 
Apple
Remote Desktop™ for Mac OS X software enables users, teachers and administrators to remotely manage other Macintosh systems anywhere on a local network,
AirPort® wireless network or across the Internet. With Apple Remote Desktop, teachers can view students' computer screens, perform group
demonstrations and help individuals with real-time screen-sharing, text chat and the "request attention" command. System administrators can provide remote assistance, get comprehensive
system profiles, reconfigure system settings and quickly and easily distribute software applications across hundreds of computers—all from one central location over both Ethernet and
AirPort wireless networks. Apple Remote Desktop supports multiple levels of administrator access, each with its own password, providing a secure way for teachers or department-level administrators to
assist users while restricting privileges for deleting items or changing system settings. 
Professional Application Software  
Final Cut Pro® is a video editing application designed to meet the demanding needs of professional video editors by providing them with a
high-performance, scalable, and cost-effective solution for editing in virtually any format: DV, SD, HD and film. Final Cut Pro includes tools for editing, compositing and
effects, color-correction and audio. Final Cut Pro 4, released in June 2003, introduced RT Extreme, a multi-stream real-time effects engine, new interface customization tools, high
performance codecs for uncompressed SD and HD video, and
32-bit floating point (per channel) image processing. Final Cut Pro 4 also includes three completely new integrated tools—LiveType for creating animated, broadcast-quality
titles, Soundtrack for music composition, and Compressor for batch encoding and output of high-quality MPEG-2, MPEG-4, and QuickTime files directly from Final Cut
Pro 4's timeline. Version 4.1 of Final Cut Pro was released in November 2003 and included optimizations for the Power Mac G5 and Mac OS X Panther. 
Shake® 3, an upgrade of the Company's compositing and visual effects software designed for large format film and video productions, was
announced in April 2003 and released in June 2003. Shake 3 includes new Mac OS X only features such as the Shake Qmaster network render management software and unlimited network
rendering licenses which allow visual effects artists to easily distribute rendering tasks across a cluster of Apple's Xserve rack servers or desktop Power Macintosh computers for enhanced performance 
6


 

and
efficiency. Shake 3 also includes new visual effects features available to Mac OS X, Linux and IRIX customers including motion-tracking and real-time broadcast preview. 
The
Company acquired Emagic, a leading provider of professional software and hardware solutions for computer based music production, during the fourth quarter of 2002. Emagic's most popular product,
Logic®, is actively used by musicians around the world and by professionals in music production, film scoring, and post-production facilities. It combines composition, notation
and audio production facilities in one comprehensive product. Logic Platinum offers a comprehensive set of music creation tools featuring rock-solid MIDI timing and synchronization, mixing
and automation with total recall, and non-destructive real-time editing of both audio and MIDI. It also offers MIDI timing with 960 PPQN and sends and receives synchronized
MIDI clock, MTC, MMC and word clock signals, making it ideal for film, TV and video post-production facilities. 
DVD
Studio Pro® 2 was announced in April 2003 and released in August 2003. It is a completely new DVD authoring product,
rebuilt from the ground up with a new user interface, professionally designed and fully customizable templates, an innovative new menu editor, timeline-based track editing and a new software-based
MPEG-2 encoder. 
Consumer, Education and Business Oriented Application Software  
Introduced in January 2003, iLife™ is the Company's integrated suite of digital lifestyle applications that features the Company's iTunes®,
iPhoto™, iMovie™®, and iDVD™ software applications. These applications are integrated to allow users
easy access to their digital music, photos and movies from within each application. All of these iLife applications come preinstalled on the Company's Macintosh systems, except for iDVD, which is only
available on Macintosh systems configured with a SuperDrive. 
iTunes®
is a digital music management application that lets users create and manage their own digital music library. iTunes organizes music using searching, browsing and playlist features.
It supports both audio and MP3 CD burning, features a graphic equalizer and cross fading between songs, and supports automatic synchronization with the music stored on an iPod. In July 2002,
the Company introduced iTunes 3, featuring Smart Playlists, which automatically and dynamically updates playlists based on simple rules set by the user, and Sound Check for consistent volume playback.
In April 2003, the Company launched iTunes 4, which integrated the Company's iTunes Music Store. Further discussion on the iTunes Music Store may be found below under the heading "Internet
Software, Integration, and Services." In October 2003, the Company launched iTunes for Windows, the first version of the Company's digital music management software for users of Windows-based
personal computers. iTunes for Windows includes all of the same features as the Macintosh version, including MP3 and AAC encoding from audio CDs, Smart Playlists, free Internet radio stations, and the
ability to burn custom playlists to CDs and MP3 CDs, burn content to DVDs to back-up an entire music collection and share music between networked computers via Rendezvous™, the
Company's zero configuration networking technology. 
iMovie®,
the Company's easy-to-use consumer digital video editing software for creation of home and classroom movies, features an enhanced user interface, improved
audio editing capabilities, enhanced controls for titling and transitions, and added special effects. 
iDVD™
is consumer oriented software that makes it easy to turn iMovie files, QuickTime files and digital pictures into DVDs that can be played on most consumer DVD players. iDVD simplifies
DVD authoring by including professionally designed themes and drag-and-drop simplicity. 
iPhoto™
is consumer oriented digital photo software that makes it easy to import, edit, save, share, and print digital photos, as well as organize and manage an entire digital photo
collection containing thousands of photos. Users are able to view their photos in full-screen; use the slide show feature accompanied by their favorite music; automatically create custom
web pages of their photos; email photos to friends and family; order professionally-processed prints and enlargements online; or easily design and order custom- 
7


 

printed,
linen-covered hard bound photo books online. Prints, enlargements, and hardbound book production are currently only available to U.S. and Canadian customers. 
The
Company's iChat AV software application and the iSight digital video camera together enable high-quality audio and video conferences between two Macintosh systems over broadband
connections. iChat AV also enables audio conferences over dial-up connections to the Internet. iChat AV requires no setup or configuration beyond installing the software
and plugging in a FireWire video camera and microphone, such as iSight or certain third-party FireWire based cameras with microphones. 
Final
Cut® Express, introduced in January 2003, is based on Apple's award-winning Final Cut Pro software. Final Cut Express enables small business users, educators, students and
advanced hobbyists to perform professional-quality digital video editing. Final Cut Express includes key features used by video editors such as the same interface and workflow as Final Cut Pro,
powerful video editing tools, hundreds of special effects, and easy delivery of output to DVD, the Internet, or tape. 
Keynote™
is the Company's presentation software introduced in January 2003 that gives users the ability to create high-quality presentations. Designed to be easy to use,
Keynote includes professionally designed themes, advanced typography, professional-quality image resizing, animated charts and tables that can be created quickly, and cinematic-quality transitions.
Keynote imports and exports PowerPoint, QuickTime, and PDF files to simplify the creation and sharing of presentations. 
AppleWorks®
6.2 is an integrated productivity application that incorporates word processing, page layout, image manipulation, spreadsheets, databases and presentations in a single
application. Intended to be an easy-to-use product for the Company's consumer and education customers, AppleWorks makes it simple to create professional-looking documents in
the classroom and at home. 
FileMaker
Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, develops, publishes, and distributes desktop-based database management application software for Mac OS and Windows-based systems. The
FileMaker® Pro database software and related products offer strong relational databases and advanced desktop-to-web
publishing capabilities. 
Third-Party Software Products  
Thousands of third-party software titles and solutions are available for the Macintosh platform. The Company sells a variety of these third-party software products directly to
end users through both its retail and online stores. 
Internet Software, Integration, and Services  
Apple's Internet strategy is focused on delivering seamless integration with and access to the Internet throughout the Company's product lines. The Company's Internet products
and technologies adhere to many industry standards in order to provide an optimized user experience through interoperability. An easy Internet Setup Assistant is included with the Mac OS. 
iTunes Music Store™  
In April 2003, the Company launched the iTunes Music Store in the United States, an online music store that allows Macintosh customers to find, purchase, and download
music for 99 cents per song or, in most cases, $9.99 per album. The iTunes Music Store is fully integrated with a one-click download directly into the latest version of the iTunes
software, allowing customers to purchase, download, organize, share, and transfer their digital music to an iPod using a single software application. Requiring no subscription fee, the iTunes Music
Store with iTunes software offers customers a broad range of personal rights to the songs purchased, including playing songs on up to three computers, burning songs onto an unlimited number of CDs for
personal use, playing songs on an unlimited number of iPods, and using songs in certain applications such as iPhoto, iMovie, and iDVD. Users can easily search the contents of the entire music 
8


 
store
to locate songs by title, artist, or album, or browse the entire contents of the music store by genre and artist. Users can also listen to a free 30-second preview of any song in the
store. 
The
second generation of the iTunes Music Store for both Macintosh and Windows users became available in October 2003. New features of the music store include online gift certificates that can
be sent to family and friends via e-mail, an "allowance" feature that enables users to automatically deposit funds into an iTunes Music Store account every month, and the availability of
audio books for purchase directly from the iTunes Music Store. The Company is exploring ways to enhance awareness and promote use of the iTunes Music Store, including arrangements with America
Online, Inc. (AOL) to integrate links to the iTunes Music Store into AOL's Music site and Pepsi-Cola North America to give away songs from the iTunes Music Store. 
Safari™  
In June 2003, the Company introduced Safari 1.0, the Company's new Mac OS X compatible web browser that is capable of loading web pages rapidly. Safari uses the advanced
interface technologies underlying Mac OS X and includes built-in Google search; SnapBack™ to instantly return to search results; a new way to name, organize and present
bookmarks; tabbed browsing; and automatic "pop-up" ad blocking. The Company also released a software development kit that allows developers to embed the Safari HTML rendering engine
directly into their applications. 
Quicktime® 
QuickTime,
the Company's multimedia software for Macintosh and Windows platforms, features streaming of live and stored video and audio over the Internet and playback of high-quality audio
and video on computers. The current version of QuickTime,
QuickTime 6, features support for the open-standard MPEG 4 format. QuickTime 6 includes the new Instant-On Streaming feature that eliminates buffer delays and provides users
with the ability to quickly and easily scrub through streaming media content to locate and instantly view specific sections. In addition, QuickTime 6 running on Mac OS X now supports JPEG 2000, the
next generation JPEG standard that allows users to capture still images in a higher quality and smaller file size than ever before. QuickTime 6 also includes AAC, the standard MPEG-4 audio
format. AAC is the next generation professional-quality audio format that delivers superior sound quality with reduced file sizes. 
The
Company also offers several other QuickTime products, including QuickTime Pro, a suite of software tools that allows creation and editing of Internet-ready audio and video files and allows a user
to add special effects and other features to QuickTime movies; QuickTime Streaming Server which facilitates the broadcasting of streaming digital video; and QuickTime Broadcaster that allows users to
quickly and easily produce professional-quality live events for online delivery. 
.Mac™ 
The
Company's .Mac offering is a suite of Internet services that for an annual fee provides Macintosh users with powerful Internet tools. .Mac features email service with IMAP, POP or
web-based access, 100MB of iDisk Internet storage, and hosting for personalized homepages and shared digital photo albums. Also included with .Mac is McAfee's Virex anti-virus
software and Backup, a personal back-up solution allowing users to archive data to their Internet storage, CD, or DVD. 
Wireless Connectivity and Networking  
AirPort Extreme™® 
AirPort
Extreme, introduced in January 2003, is the Company's next generation of Wi-Fi wireless networking technology based on the new ultra-fast 802.11g standard. With
speeds up to 54 Mbps, AirPort Extreme delivers almost five times the data rate of today's 802.11b based products, yet is fully compatible with the millions of 802.11b Wi-Fi devices around
the world. AirPort Extreme Base Stations can serve up 
9


 
to
50 Macintosh and Windows users simultaneously, provide wireless bridging to extend the range beyond just one base station, and support USB printer sharing to allow multiple users to wirelessly
share USB printers connected directly to the base station. 
Embedded
into Mac OS X is Bluetooth technology. Bluetooth is an emerging industry standard for wirelessly connecting computers and peripherals that supports transmission of data at up to 1 Mbps within
a range of approximately 30 feet. The Company's Bluetooth technology for Mac OS X lets customers wirelessly share files between Macintosh systems, synchronize and share contact information with
Palm-OS based PDAs, and access the Internet through Bluetooth-enabled cell phones. A Bluetooth USB adaptor can Bluetooth-enable any USB-based Macintosh computer running in Mac
OS X version 10.1.4 or higher. 
The
Company's Rendezvous™ networking technology is based on open Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Standard Protocols such as IP, ARP and DNS. Rendezvous uses industry standard
networking protocols and zero configuration technology to automatically discover and connect devices over any IP network, including Ethernet or 802.11-based wireless networks like the
Company's AirPort product. Major developers such as Canon, Epson, Hewlett-Packard, Lexmark, Philips, Sybase, World Book and Xerox have announced support for Rendezvous in a broad range of products
including network printers, consumer electronics, enterprise database management and educational applications. The Company has made the Rendezvous source code freely available allowing developers to
use Rendezvous technology in their network-enabled devices or software applications. The Rendezvous source code includes software to support UNIX, Linux, and Windows-based systems and devices.
Rendezvous support is built into Mac OS X. 
The
Company developed FireWire® technology, also referred to as IEEE 1394, which is a high-speed serial I/O technology for
connecting digital devices such as digital camcorders and cameras to desktop and portable computers. With its high data-transfer speed and "hot plug-and-play"
capability, FireWire has become an established cross-platform industry standard for both consumers and professionals and is the data interface of choice for today's digital video and audio devices, as
well as external hard drives and other high-speed peripherals. FireWire is currently included on all Macintosh systems and is a data transfer technology utilized by iPod. 
Product Support and Services  
AppleCare® offers a range of support options for Apple customers. These options include assistance that is built
into software products, printed and electronic product manuals, online support including comprehensive product information as well as technical assistance, and the AppleCare Protection Plan. The
AppleCare Protection Plan is a fee-based service that typically includes three years of phone support and hardware repairs, dedicated web-based support resources, and user
diagnostic tools. 
Apple
Training offers comprehensive system administration and development training on Apple technologies, together with certification programs that test customers' skills and verify their technical
proficiency. Apple Professional Services offers a range of custom, personalized technical services, including Internet consulting and setup, installation and integration services. The Company also
offers
specialized loan programs including loans for consumers, students, and educators. Apple also provides leasing solutions for its education institution customers and its business and professional
customers. The Company uses several third-party lenders to originate and carry these loans and leases, all of which are non-recourse to the Company. 
Specialized Education Products and Services  
The Company offers a variety of unique services and products to its education customers, including a separate online store for education customers offering special education
price lists and promotions; special financing programs for K-12 and higher education students, faculty, and staff; a special edition of its productivity software suite, AppleWorks, that is
cross platform for both Macintosh and Windows computers; the iBook Wireless Mobile Lab that allows teachers and students to share iBook computers, a printer, and a wireless network/Internet connection
stored on a cart for mobility between classrooms; and 
10


 
three
special Digital Media Studio solutions designed for education, including one that is integrated into a mobile cart. Additionally, Apple Professional Services offers a range of technical services
to education customers. 
In
2001, Apple acquired PowerSchool Inc., a privately held provider of web-based student information systems for K-12 schools and school districts.
PowerSchool® software products give school administrators and teachers the ability to easily and cost-effectively manage student
records and give parents real-time access to track their children's performance via the Internet. PowerSchool offers the option of remote hosting with an application service provider
model. 
Markets and Distribution  
The Company's customers are primarily in the education, creative, consumer, and business markets. Certain customers are attracted to Macintosh computers for a variety of
reasons, including the reduced amount of training resulting from the Macintosh computer's intuitive ease of use, advanced graphics capabilities, industrial design features of the Company's hardware
products, and ability of Macintosh computers to network and communicate with other computer systems and environments. Apple personal computers were first introduced to education customers in the late
1970s. Over 18% of the Company's net sales in 2003 were to education customers in the United States, including sales to elementary and secondary schools and college and university customers. 
The
Company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers and cataloguers. No individual customer accounted for more than 10% of net sales in 2003, 2002 or
2001. The Company also sells many of its products and resells certain third-party products in most of its
major markets directly to education customers, consumers, businesses, and certain resellers through its retail stores in the United States, or through one of its online stores around the world. Total
direct and indirect sales attributable to the Company's online stores totaled approximately $2.9 billion, $2.4 billion, and $2.0 billion for fiscal years 2003, 2002 and 2001,
respectively. 
Competition  
The Company is confronted by aggressive competition in all areas of its business. The market for the design, manufacture, and sale of personal computers and related software
and peripheral products is highly competitive. This market continues to be characterized by rapid technological advances in both hardware and software development, which have substantially increased
the capabilities and applications of these products, and have resulted in the frequent introduction of new products and significant price, feature, and performance competition. Over the past several
years, price competition in the market for personal computers has been particularly intense. The Company's competitors who sell personal computers based on other operating systems have aggressively
cut prices and lowered their product margins to gain or maintain market share. The Company's results of operations and financial condition have been, and in the future may continue to be, adversely
affected by these and other industry-wide downward pressures on gross margins. 
The
principal competitive factors in the market for personal computers include relative price/performance, product quality and reliability, design innovation, availability of software, product
features, marketing and distribution capability, service and support, availability of hardware peripherals, and corporate reputation. Further, as the personal computer industry and its customers place
more reliance on the Internet, an increasing number of Internet devices that are smaller, simpler, and less expensive than traditional personal computers may compete for market share with the
Company's existing products. 
The
Company is currently taking and will continue to take steps to respond to the competitive pressures being placed on its personal computer sales as a result of innovations in competing platforms.
The Company's future operating results and financial condition are substantially dependent on its ability to continue to develop improvements to the Macintosh platform in order to maintain perceived
functional and design advantages over competing platforms. 
11



  


The Company's initial success with the development of an end-to-end music offering, which includes the iTunes digital music management software, iTunes Music Store and iPod
digital music player, has already encouraged significant competition in this area from other companies, many of whom have greater financial, marketing, and manufacturing resources than those of the
Company. The Company believes it maintains a competitive advantage by more effectively integrating the entire end-to-end music solution, including the hardware (iPod), software
(iTunes) and music content (iTunes Music Store). 
Raw Materials  
Although most components essential to the Company's business are generally available from multiple sources, certain key components (including microprocessors and
application-specific integrated circuits ("ASICs")) are currently obtained by the Company from single or limited sources. Some other key components, while currently available to the Company from
multiple sources, are at times subject to industry wide availability constraints and pricing pressures. In addition, the Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal
computer industry, and new products introduced by the Company often initially utilize custom components obtained from only one source until the Company has evaluated whether there is a need for, and
subsequently qualifies, additional suppliers. If the supply of a key or single-sourced component to the Company were to be delayed or curtailed or in the event a key manufacturing vendor delays
shipments of completed products to the Company, the Company's ability to ship related products in desired quantities and in a timely manner could be adversely affected. The Company's business and
financial performance could also be adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from an
alternative source. Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of common components instead of components customized to
meet the Company's requirements. The Company attempts to mitigate these potential risks by working closely with these and other key suppliers on product introduction plans, strategic inventories,
coordinated product introductions, and internal and external manufacturing schedules and levels. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of formal
purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company's requirements for periods ranging from 30 to
130 days. 
The
Company believes there are several component suppliers and manufacturing vendors whose loss to the Company could have a material adverse effect upon the Company's business and financial position.
At this time, such vendors include Agere Systems, Inc., Ambit Microsystems Corporation, ASUSTeK Corporation, ATI Technologies, Inc., Broadcom Corporation, Compal Corporation, Hon Hai
Precision Industry Co., Ltd., IBM Corporation, International Display Technology, Inventec Appliances Corporation, LG. Phillips Co., Ltd., Matsushita, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation,
Motorola, Inc., Nvidia Corp., Quanta Computer, Inc., Samsung Electronics, Synaptics, Inc., and Toshiba Corporation. 
Research and Development  
Because the personal computer industry is characterized by rapid technological advances, the Company's ability to compete successfully is heavily dependent upon its ability to
ensure a continuing and timely flow of competitive products and technology to the marketplace. The Company continues to develop new products and technologies and to enhance existing products in the
areas of hardware and peripherals, system software, applications software, networking and communications software and solutions, and the Internet. The Company's research and development expenditures,
before any charges for purchased in-process research and development, totaled $471 million, $446 million, and $430 million in 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. 
12


 
Patents, Trademarks, Copyrights and Licenses  
The Company currently holds rights to patents and copyrights relating to certain aspects of its computer systems, peripheral systems, and software. In addition, the Company has
registered, and/or has applied to register, trademarks and service marks in the United States and a number of foreign countries for "Apple," the Apple logo, "Macintosh," and numerous other trademarks
and service marks. Although the Company believes the ownership of such patents, copyrights, trademarks and service marks is an important factor in its business and that its success does depend in part
on the ownership thereof, the Company relies primarily on the innovative skills, technical competence, and marketing abilities of its personnel. 
Many
of the Company's products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from third-parties. While it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew licenses relating to various aspects
of its products and business methods, the Company believes that based upon past experience and industry practice, such licenses generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms; however,
there is no guarantee that such licenses could be obtained at all. Because of technological changes in the computer industry, current extensive patent coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new
patents, it is possible certain components of the Company's products and business methods may unknowingly infringe existing patents of others. The Company has from time to time been notified that it
may be infringing certain patents or other intellectual property rights of others. 
Foreign and Domestic Operations and Geographic Data  
The United States represents the Company's largest geographic marketplace. Approximately 58% of the Company's net sales in fiscal 2003 came from sales to customers inside the
United States. Final assembly of products sold by the Company is conducted in the Company's manufacturing facilities in Sacramento, California, and Cork, Ireland, and by external vendors in Fremont,
California, Fullerton, California, Taiwan, Korea, the Netherlands, the People's Republic of China, and the Czech Republic.
Currently, manufacture of many of the components used in the Company's products and final assembly of substantially all of the Company's portable products including PowerBooks, iBooks, and the iPod
are performed by third-party vendors in Japan, Taiwan and China. Margins on sales of Apple products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign
suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties. 
Information
regarding financial data by geographic segment is set forth in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at
Note 11, "Segment Information and Geographic Data." 
Seasonal Business  
Although the Company does not consider its business to be highly seasonal, it has historically experienced increased net sales in its first and fourth fiscal quarters, compared
to other quarters in its fiscal year, due to seasonal demand related to the holiday season and the school year, respectively. Past performance should not be considered a reliable indicator of the
Company's future net sales or financial performance. 
Warranty  
The Company offers a basic limited parts and labor warranty on its hardware products. The basic warranty period for hardware products is typically one year from the date of
purchase by the end-user. The Company also offers a 90-day basic warranty for Apple software and for Apple service parts used to repair Apple hardware products. In addition,
consumers may purchase extended service coverage on most Apple hardware products in all of the Company's major markets. 
Backlog  
In the Company's experience, the actual amount of product backlog at any particular time is not a meaningful indication of its future business prospects. In particular, backlog
often increases in anticipation 
13


 
of
or immediately following new product introductions because of over ordering by dealers anticipating shortages. Backlog often is reduced once dealers and customers believe they can obtain sufficient
supply. Because of the foregoing, backlog should not be considered a reliable indicator of the Company's ability to achieve any particular level of revenue or financial performance. 
Environmental Laws  
Compliance with federal, state, local, and foreign laws enacted for the protection of the environment has to date had no material effect upon the Company's capital
expenditures, earnings, or competitive position. Although the Company does not anticipate any material adverse effects in the future based on the nature of its operations and the subject of these
laws, there is no assurance that such existing laws or future laws will not have a material adverse affect on the Company. 
Production
and marketing of products in certain states and countries may subject the Company to environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the requirement that the Company
provide consumers with the ability to return to the Company product at the end of its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or recycling with the Company. Such laws
and regulations have recently been passed in several jurisdictions in which the Company operates, including various European Union member states, Japan and California. Although the Company does not
anticipate any material adverse effects in the future based on the nature of its operations and the thrust of such laws, there is no assurance that such existing laws or future laws will not have a
material adverse affect on the Company. 
Employees  
As of September 27, 2003, Apple and its subsidiaries worldwide had 10,912 employees and an additional 2,654 temporary employees and contractors. 
Available Information  
Beginning in fiscal 2003, the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on
Form 8-K, and amendments to reports filed pursuant to Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, are available on its website at
www.apple.com/investor when such reports are available on the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) website. The public may read and copy any materials filed by the Company with the SEC at the
SEC's Public Reference Room at 450 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at
1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC maintains an Internet site that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other information regarding issuers that file
electronically with the SEC at http://www.sec.gov. The contents of these websites are not incorporated into this filing. Further, the Company's references to the URLs for these websites are intended
to be inactive textual references only. 
 
 
Item 2. Properties     
The
Company's headquarters are located in Cupertino, California. The Company has manufacturing facilities in Sacramento, California and Cork, Ireland. As of September 27, 2003, the Company
leased approximately 3.2 million square feet of space, primarily in the United States, and to a lesser extent, in Europe, Japan, and the Asia Pacific region. Leased space in the United States
includes 538,000 square feet of retail space. The major facility leases are for terms of 5 to 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms of 3 to 5 additional years. Leases for
retail space are for terms of 5 to 15 years and often contain multi-year renewal options. 
The
Company owns its manufacturing facility in Cork, Ireland, which has approximately 352,000 square feet. The Company also owns a 752,000 square-foot facility in Sacramento, California,
which is used as a manufacturing, warehousing and distribution center. The Sacramento and Cork facilities also house 
14


 

customer
support call centers. In addition, the Company owns 930,000 square feet of facilities located in Cupertino, California, used for research and development and corporate functions. Outside the
United States, the Company owns additional facilities totaling approximately 169,000 square feet. 
The
Company believes its existing facilities and equipment are well maintained and in good operating condition. The Company has invested in internal capacity and strategic relationships with outside
manufacturing vendors, and therefore believes it has adequate manufacturing capacity for the foreseeable future. The Company continues to make investments in capital equipment as needed to meet
anticipated demand for its products. 
 
 
Item 3. Legal Proceedings     
The
Company is subject to various legal proceedings and claims that are discussed below. The Company is also subject to certain other legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary
course of business and which have not been fully adjudicated. In the opinion of management, the Company does not have a potential liability related to any current legal proceedings and claims that
would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity or results of operations. However, the results of legal proceedings cannot be predicted with
certainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of these legal matters or should several of these legal matters be resolved against the Company in the same reporting period, the operating results
of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. The Company settled certain legal matters in 2003, which did not individually or in the aggregate have a material impact on the
Company's results of operations. 
Antor Media Corporation v. Apple Computer, Inc. et al.  
Plaintiff, Antor Media filed this action on September 5, 2003 in the United States District Court in the Eastern District of Texas alleging infringement by the Company
and other defendants of patent 5,754,961 relating to a "Method and Apparatus for Transmitting Information Recorded on Information Storage Means from a Central Server to Subscribers via a High Data
Rate Digital Telecommunications Network." Plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The Company has answered the complaint, denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative
defenses. The Company also asserted counterclaims requesting declaratory judgment for non-infringement and invalidity. 
Apple Corps Ltd. v. Apple Computer, Inc.; Apple Computer, Inc. v. Apple Corps Ltd.  
Plaintiff, Apple Corps filed this action on July 4, 2003 in the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, in London alleging that the Company has breached a 1991
agreement which resolved earlier trademark litigation regarding use of the Apple marks. Plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The Company filed a motion on October 13, 2003,
challenging jurisdiction in the U.K. On October 8, 2003, the Company filed a case in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California requesting a declaratory judgment
that the Company has not breached the 1991 agreement. 
Articulate Systems, Inc. v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff Articulate filed this action in March 1996 in the United States District Court in Massachusetts claiming patent infringement relating to voice recognition
technology. Plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The Company has answered the complaint, denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. The Company also asserted
counterclaims requesting declaratory judgment for non-infringement, unenforceability and invalidity. The case was stayed for several months pending resolution of four summary judgment
motions filed by the Company, all of which were denied by the Court. Through a series of corporate transactions the assets belonging to Plaintiff were acquired by a subsidiary, Lernout &
Hauspie Speech Products N.V. ("L&H"). L&H filed for bankruptcy in November 2000 and is being liquidated as part of the bankruptcy. The case has been inactive since approximately
May 2002, pending the resolution of the L&H bankruptcy and liquidation. 
15


 
Bancroft v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff Bancroft filed this purported class action on January 30, 2002 in Los Angeles Superior Court on behalf of a potentially nationwide class of purchasers of
certain Power Macintosh G3 computers. Plaintiff alleged violation of the Consumer Legal Remedies Act ("CLRA") arising from allegedly poor performance while running the Company's Mac OS X operating
system, specifically relating to 2D hardware acceleration, QuickTime movie hardware acceleration, 3D graphics performance and DVD movie playback. The parties reached a settlement and the Court granted
preliminary approval on September 2, 2003. The final approval hearing is set for January 26, 2004. Settlement of the matter will not have a material effect on the Company's financial
position or results of operations. 
BIAX Corporation v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff BIAX filed this action on September 5, 2001 in the United States District Court in Delaware claiming patent infringement relating to dual processor technology.
IBM and Motorola were added as defendants in an amended complaint. Plaintiff sought unspecified damages and other relief. The Company answered the complaint, denied all allegations and asserted
numerous affirmative defenses. The Company also asserted counterclaims for declaratory judgment for non-infringement, unenforceability and invalidity. The parties settled this case in
August 2003 and the matter is concluded. Settlement of this matter did not have a material effect on the Company's financial position or results of operations. 
Dan, et al. v. Apple Computer, Inc. et al.  
Plaintiffs filed this purported class action on September 22, 2003 in Los Angeles Superior Court against the Company and other members of the industry on behalf of a
nationwide class of purchasers of certain computer hard drives. The case alleges violations of Civil Code Section 17200 ("Unfair Competition"), the Consumer Legal Remedies Act ("CLRA") and
false advertising related to the size
of the drives. Plaintiffs allege that calculation of hard drive size using the decimal method misrepresents the actual size of the drive. The complaint seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The
case is stayed pending resolution of whether the case will be considered "complex" and potentially a new judge assigned. The Company is beginning its investigation of these allegations. 
Digital Development Corporation v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff, Digital Development Corporation filed this action on April 25, 2003 in the United States District Court in New Jersey, claiming patent infringement of two
patents, 4,975,950 and 5,121,345, related to a "System and Method of Protecting Integrity of Computer Data and Software." Plaintiff requests unspecified damages and other relief. The complaint has not
yet been served on the Company. 
Dowhal v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff filed this representative action in San Francisco County Superior Court on February 4, 2003 alleging that the Company and numerous other defendants have
participated in false advertising and unfair business practices related to alleged misrepresentation of printer speed. Plaintiff asserts causes of action for violation of California Business and
Professions Code §17200 and §17500. Plaintiff requests an injunction, restitution and other unspecified damages and relief. The Company was served on February 10, 2003.
Apple filed a response on March 12, 2003. The parties are in discovery. 
Dynacore Holdings Corp. v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff Dynacore filed this action on June 6, 2001 in United States District Court for the Southern District of New York against the Company and thirteen other
defendants claiming patent infringement relating to IEEE 1394 technology, also known as FireWire. Plaintiff claims that any computer system or other electronic product that uses or complies with the
IEEE 1394 standard violates the patent. Plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The Company has answered the complaint, denying all allegations and asserting numerous affirmative
defenses. The Company also asserted counterclaims requesting declaratory judgment for non-infringement and invalidity. Defendants are seeking to amend the 
16


 
pleading
to assert a counterclaim for inequitable conduct against Dynacore. The case was initially stayed pending the Federal Circuit's decision in Datapoint Corp. v. Standard Microsystems Corp., a
related case in which plaintiff claimed that its patent was infringed by products complying with the fast Ethernet standard. In February 2002, the Federal Circuit affirmed the judgment of
non-infringement in Datapoint, and the District Court lifted the stay in this action. The defendants in this action filed a joint motion for summary judgment based upon the decision in
Datapoint. The Court heard the motion on October 4, 2002 and granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants on February 11, 2003. Dynacore has appealed the ruling. The parties have
filed their respective briefs, and the case is scheduled for oral argument before the Federal Circuit Court on January 5, 2004. 
Hawaii Structural Iron Workers and Pension Trust Fund v. Apple Computer, Inc. and Steven P. Jobs; Young v. Apple Computer, Inc. et al;
Hsu v. Apple Computer Inc. et al  
Beginning on September 27, 2001, three shareholder class action lawsuits were filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California against
the Company and its Chief Executive Officer. These lawsuits are substantially identical, and purport to bring suit on behalf of persons who purchased the Company's publicly traded common stock between
July 19, 2000, and September 28, 2000. The complaints allege violations of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act and seek unspecified compensatory damages and other relief. The Company
believes these claims are without merit and intends to defend them vigorously. The Company filed a motion to dismiss on June 4, 2002, which was heard by the Court on September 13, 2002.
On December 11, 2002, the Court granted the Company's motion to dismiss for failure to state a cause of action, with leave to Plaintiffs to amend their complaint within thirty days. Plaintiffs
filed their amended complaint on January 31, 2003, and on March 17, 2003, the Company filed a motion to dismiss the amended complaint. The Court heard the Company's motion on
July 11, 2003 and dismissed Plaintiff's claims with prejudice on August 12, 2003. Plaintiffs have appealed the ruling. 
John W. Davis v Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff filed this purported class action in San Francisco County Superior Court on December 5, 2002, alleging that the Company has engaged in unfair and deceptive
business practices relating to its AppleCare Extended Service and Warranty Plan. Plaintiff asserts causes of action for violation of the California Business and Professions Code §17200 and
§17500, breach of the Song-Beverly Warranty Act, intentional misrepresentation and concealment. The
Company was served on December 11, 2002 and is continuing its investigation of the allegations. Plaintiff requests unspecified damages and other relief. Apple filed a motion on
October 29, 2003 to disqualify Plaintiff's counsel, which the Court approved. The case is set for trial on February 23, 2004. 
MacTech v. Apple Computer, Inc.; Macadam v. Apple Computer, Inc.; Computer International, Inc. v. Apple Computer, Inc.; Elite Computers and
Software, Inc. v. Apple Computer, Inc.; The Neighborhood Computer Store v. Apple Computer, Inc. (All in Santa Clara County Superior Court). 
Five
resellers have filed similar lawsuits against the Company for various causes of action including breach of contract, fraud, negligent and intentional interference with economic relationship,
negligent misrepresentation, trade libel, unfair competition and false advertising. Plaintiffs request unspecified damages and other relief. The parties are in discovery. On October 1, 2003,
one of the resellers, Macadam was deauthorized as an Apple reseller. Macadam filed a motion for a temporary order to re-instate it as a reseller, which the Court denied. A hearing on its
motion for a preliminary injunction is scheduled for December 18, 2003. 
Palmieri v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff filed this purported class action on September 5, 2003 in Los Angeles Superior Court on behalf of a nationwide class of purchasers of certain PowerBooks. The
case alleges violations of Civil Code Section 17200 (Unfair Competition) and the Consumer Legal Remedies Act ("CLRA") arising from an alleged design defect in the PowerBooks which purportedly
causes marks and dead pixels in the LCD 
17


 
screens.
Plaintiffs amended their complaint to allege an additional defect in the new 15" PowerBook, introduced in September, 2003, which purportedly causes "white spots" on the screen. The complaint
seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The Company's response is not yet due. The Company is beginning its investigation of these allegations. 
TIBCO Software, Inc. v. Apple Computer, Inc.  
Plaintiff filed this case on August 27, 2003 in United States District Court for the Northern District of California alleging trademark infringement by the Company for
using the mark "Rendezvous." Plaintiff's mark is "TIBCO Rendezvous." The complaint seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The Company answered the complaint denying all allegations and asserting
numerous affirmative defenses. The Company also asserted counterclaims requesting a declaratory judgment for non-infringement, invalidity and no dilution. 
UNOVA, Inc. v. Apple Computer, Inc., et al.  
Plaintiff UNOVA filed this patent infringement action against the Company and six other defendants on May 8, 2002 in the Central District of California for infringement
of eight UNOVA patents related to "Smart Battery Management." Plaintiff alleges that the Company's portable computers manufactured since 1996 infringe these eight patents. Plaintiff has filed similar
lawsuits against other companies in addition to the co-defendants in this case. Plaintiff seeks unspecified damages and other relief. The Company has answered the complaint, denying all
allegations and asserting numerous affirmative defenses. The Company also asserted counterclaims requesting a declaratory judgment for non-infringement, invalidity and unenforceability.
The case is in discovery and is set for trial on March 16, 2004. 
 
 
Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders     
No
matters were submitted to a vote of security holders during the fourth quarter of the Company's fiscal year ended September 27, 2003. 
18



  

 
 
PART II     
 
  Item 5. Market for the Registrant's Common Equity and Related Shareholder Matters     
The
Company's common stock is traded on the over-the-counter market and is quoted on the Nasdaq National Market under the symbol AAPL, on the Tokyo Stock Exchange under the
symbol APPLE, and on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange under the symbol APCD. As of December 5, 2003, there were 29,015 shareholders of record. 
On
June 21, 2000, the Company effected a two-for-one stock split in the form of a Common Stock dividend to shareholders of record as of May 19, 2000. All share
price and per share data and numbers of common shares have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the stock split. The Company did not pay cash dividends in either fiscal 2003 or 2002. The Company
anticipates that, for the foreseeable future, it will retain any earnings for use in the operation of its business. The price range per share of common stock presented below represents the highest and
lowest closing prices for the Company's common stock on the Nasdaq National Market during each quarter. 



 
 
Fourth Quarter
 
Third Quarter
 
Second Quarter
 
First Quarter


Fiscal 2003 price range per common share
 
$
23.10-$19.06
 
$
19.29-$13.12
 
$
15.27-$13.80
 
$
17.22-$13.59



Fiscal 2002 price range per common share
 
$

18.74-$13.99
 
$

26.11-$16.55
 
$

25.45-$20.78
 
$

23.76-$14.98



 
 
Item 6. Selected Financial Data     
The
following selected financial information has been derived from the audited consolidated financial statements. The information set forth below is not necessarily indicative of results of future
operations, and should be read in conjunction with Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and the consolidated financial statements and related
notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K in order to fully understand factors that may affect the comparability of the information presented below. 



Five fiscal years ended September 27, 2003 (In millions, except share and per share amounts)

 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 
2000
 
1999


Net sales
 
$
6,207
 
$
5,742
 
$
5,363
 
$
7,983
 
$
6,134


Net income (loss)
 
$
69
 
$
65
 
$
(25
)
$
786
 
$
601


Earnings (loss) per common share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Basic
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)
$
2.42
 
$
2.10


 
Diluted
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)
$
2.18
 
$
1.81


Cash dividends declared per common share
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—


Shares used in computing earnings (loss) per share (in thousands):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Basic
 
 
360,631
 
 
355,022
 
 
345,613
 
 
324,568
 
 
286,314


 
Diluted
 
 
363,466
 
 
361,785
 
 
345,613
 
 
360,324
 
 
348,328


Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
 
$
4,566
 
$
4,337
 
$
4,336
 
$
4,027
 
$
3,226


Total assets
 
$
6,815
 
$
6,298
 
$
6,021
 
$
6,803
 
$
5,161


Long-term debt (including current maturities)
 
$
304
 
$
316
 
$
317
 
$
300
 
$
300


Total liabilities
 
$
2,592
 
$
2,203
 
$
2,101
 
$
2,696
 
$
2,057


Shareholders' equity
 
$
4,223
 
$
4,095
 
$
3,920
 
$
4,107
 
$
3,104



Net
gains before taxes related to the Company's non-current debt and equity investments of $10 million, $75 million, $367 million, and $230 million were
recognized in 2003, 2001, 2000, and 1999, respectively. A net loss before taxes related to the Company's non-current debt and equity investments of $42 million was 
19


 

recognized
in 2002. In 2002, the Company acquired Emagic resulting in a charge of approximately $1 million for acquired in-process technologies with no alternative future use. The
Company recognized a similar charge of $11 million in 2001 related to its acquisition of PowerSchool. Net charges related to Company restructuring actions of $26 million,
$30 million, $8 million, and $27 million were recognized in 2003, 2002, 2000, and 1999, respectively. During 2000, the Company recognized the cost of a special executive bonus for
the Company's Chief Executive Officer for past services in the form of an aircraft with a total cost to the Company of approximately $90 million. In 2002, of the original $90 million
accrual, $2 million remained unspent and was reversed. In 2003, settlement of the Company's forward stock purchase agreement resulted in a gain of $6 million. Favorable cumulative-effect
type adjustments of $1 million and $12 million were recognized in 2003 and 2001, respectively. 
 
 
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations     
This section and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also
be identified by words such as "anticipates," "expects," "believes," "plans," "predicts," and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company's
actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the
subsection entitled "Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition" below. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information
presented herein is based on the Company's fiscal calendar. The Company assumes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by
law.
Critical Accounting Policies  
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and the Company's discussion and analysis of
its financial condition and results of operations requires the Company's management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial
statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K describe the significant accounting policies and
methods used in the preparation of the Company's consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be
reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates. 
Management
believes the following to be critical accounting policies. That is, they are both important to the portrayal of the Company's financial condition and results, and they require management to
make judgments and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. 
Revenue Recognition  
Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of products (i.e., hardware, software, and peripherals), and extended warranty and support contracts. The Company
recognizes revenue pursuant to applicable accounting standards, including Statement of Position (SOP) No. 97-2, Software Revenue
Recognition, as amended, and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 101, Revenue Recognition in Financial
Statements. 
The
Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered
delivered to the customer once it has been shipped, and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company's product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is
shipped. For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the United States, and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product
because the Company legally retains 
20


 

a
portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed to not be, fixed and determinable,
revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable. 
The
Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end-user rebates, and other
sales programs and volume-based incentives. The estimated cost of these programs is accrued as a reduction to revenue in the period the Company has sold the product and committed to a plan. The
Company also records reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company's historical experience. Future market conditions and product transitions may require the Company to
increase customer incentive programs and incur incremental price protection obligations that could result in additional reductions of revenue at the time such programs are offered. Additionally,
certain customer incentive programs require management to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions
of particular incentive programs. If a greater than estimated proportion of customers redeem such incentives, the Company would be required to record additional reductions to revenue, which could have
a material adverse impact on the Company's results of operations. 
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts  
The Company distributes its products through third-party resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and commercial customers. The Company generally does not require
collateral from its customers. However, when possible the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in Latin America, Europe and Asia
and by arranging with third-party financing companies to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the Company's direct customers. These credit-financing arrangements are
directly between the third-party financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements. However,
considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral, third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company's distribution and retail channel partners. 
The
allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management's assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and includes consideration of the credit worthiness and financial condition
of those specific customers. The Company records an allowance to reduce the specific receivables to the amount that is reasonably believed to be collectible. The Company also records an allowance for
all other trade receivables based on multiple factors including historical experience with bad debts, the general economic environment, the financial condition of the Company's distribution channels,
and the aging of such receivables. If there is a deterioration of a major customer's financial condition, if the Company becomes aware of additional information related to the credit worthiness of a
major customer, or if future actual default rates on trade receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, the Company may have to adjust its allowance for doubtful accounts, which
would affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made. 
Inventory Valuation and Inventory Purchase Commitments  
The Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. The Company records a write-down for inventories of
components and products, including third-party products held for resale, which have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value. The Company performs a detailed
review of inventory each period that considers multiple factors including demand forecasts, product lifecycle status, product development plans, current sales levels, and component cost trends. The
personal computer industry is subject to a rapid and unpredictable pace of product and component obsolescence and demand changes. If future demand or market conditions for the Company's products are
less favorable than forecasted or if unforeseen technological changes negatively impact the utility of component inventory, the Company may be required 
21


 
to
record additional write-downs which would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the write-downs are recorded. 
The
Company accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees related to component orders that have been cancelled. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a
combination of formal purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. These commitments typically cover the Company's requirements for periods ranging from
30 to 130 days. If there is an abrupt and substantial decline in demand for one or more of the Company's products or an unanticipated change in technological requirements for any of the
Company's products, the Company may be required to record additional reserves for cancellation fees that would negatively affect gross margins in the period when the cancellation fees are identified. 
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets Including Acquired Intangibles  
The Company reviews property, plant, and equipment and certain identifiable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying
amount of such an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of their carrying amount to future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate.
If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized in earnings equals the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds their fair market value. Although the
Company has recognized no material impairment adjustments related to its property, plant, and equipment or identifiable intangibles during the past three fiscal years, except those made in conjunction
with restructuring actions, deterioration in the Company's business in a geographic region or business segment in the future, including deterioration in the performance of individual retail stores,
could lead to such impairment adjustments in the future periods in which such business issues are identified. 
The
Company adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in the first quarter of
fiscal 2002. As a result, the Company no longer amortizes goodwill but instead performs a review of goodwill for impairment annually, or earlier if indicators of potential impairment exist. The review
of goodwill for potential impairment is highly subjective and requires that: (1) goodwill be allocated to various reporting units of the Company's business to which it relates; (2) the
Company estimate the fair value of those reporting units to which the goodwill relates;
and (3) the Company determine the book value of those reporting units. If the estimated fair value of reporting units with allocated goodwill is determined to be less than their book value, the
Company is required to estimate the fair value of all identifiable assets and liabilities of those reporting units in a manner similar to a purchase price allocation for an acquired business. This
requires independent valuation of certain internally developed and unrecognized assets including in-process research and development and developed technology. Once this process is
complete, the amount of goodwill impairment, if any, can be determined. 
Based
on the Company's estimates as of September 27, 2003, there was no impairment of goodwill. However, changes in various circumstances including changes in the Company's market
capitalization, changes in the Company's forecasts, and changes in the Company's internal business structure could cause one or more of the Company's reporting units to be valued differently thereby
causing an impairment of goodwill. Additionally, in response to changes in the personal computer industry and changes in global or regional economic conditions, the Company may strategically realign
its resources and consider restructuring, disposing, or otherwise exiting businesses, which could result in an impairment of property, plant, and equipment, identifiable intangibles, or goodwill. 
Warranty Costs  
The Company provides currently for the estimated cost for product warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized based on historical experience of failure rates. Each
quarter, the Company reevaluates its estimates to assess the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts 
22


 
as
necessary. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required and could negatively affect the Company's results
of operations. 
Income Taxes  
The Company records a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. In accordance with SFAS No. 109,  Accounting for Income Taxes, the
provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and
liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax
credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected
to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized. 
Management
believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with the tax effects of the
deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. In the event that all or part of the net deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the
future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Similarly, if the Company subsequently realizes deferred tax assets that were
previously determined to be unrealizable, the respective valuation allowance would be reversed, resulting in a positive adjustment to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition,
the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner
inconsistent with management's expectations could have a material impact on the Company's results of operations and financial position. 
23


 

Net Sales  
Net sales and Macintosh unit sales by operating segment and net sales and unit sales by product follow (net sales in millions and Macintosh unit sales in thousands): 



 
 
2003
 
Change
 
2002
 
Change
 
2001


Net Sales by Operating Segment:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Americas net sales (a)
 
$
3,181
 
2
  %
$
3,131
 
3
  %
$
3,037


 
Europe net sales
 
 
1,309
 
5
  %
 
1,251
 
0
  %
 
1,249


 
Japan net sales
 
 
698
 
(2
)%
 
710
 
0
  %
 
713


 
Retail net sales
 
 
621
 
119
  %
 
283
 
—
 
 
19


 
Other segments net sales (a)
 
 
398
 
8
  %
 
367
 
6
  %
 
345


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 
 
Total net sales
 
$
6,207
 
8
  %
$
5,742
 
7
  %
$
5,363


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



Unit Sales by Operating Segment:
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 


 
Americas Macintosh unit sales
 
 
1,620
 
(6
)%
 
1,728
 
(2
)%
 
1,768


 
Europe Macintosh unit sales
 
 
684
 
(5
)%
 
722
 
(4
)%
 
754


 
Japan Macintosh unit sales
 
 
339
 
(12
)%
 
386
 
(2
)%
 
394


 
Retail Macintosh unit sales
 
 
187
 
103
  %
 
92
 
—
 
 
7


 
Other segments Macintosh unit sales (a)
 
 
182
 
5
  %
 
173
 
5
  %
 
164


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 
 
Total Macintosh unit sales
 
 
3,012
 
(3
)%
 
3,101
 
0
  %
 
3,087


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



Net Sales by Product:
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 


 
Power Macintosh net sales (b)
 
$
1,237
 
(10
)%
$
1,380
 
(17
)%
$
1,664


 
PowerBook net sales
 
 
1,299
 
56
  %
 
831
 
2
  %
 
813


 
iMac net sales
 
 
1,238
 
(15
)%
 
1,448
 
30
  %
 
1,117


 
iBook net sales
 
 
717
 
(18
)%
 
875
 
8
  %
 
809


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 
 
Total Macintosh net sales
 
 
4,491
 
(1
)%
 
4,534
 
3
  %
 
4,403


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 

Peripherals and other hardware (c)
 
 

1,058
 

57
  %
 

674
 

74
  %
 

387


 
Software (d)
 
 
362
 
18
  %
 
307
 
33
  %
 
230


 
Service and other sales
 
 
296
 
30
  %
 
227
 
(34
)%
 
343


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 
 
Total net sales
 
$
6,207
 
8
  %
$
5,742
 
7
  %
$
5,363


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



Unit Sales by Product:
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 


 
Power Macintosh unit sales (b)
 
 
667
 
(13
)%
 
766
 
(18
)%
 
937


 
PowerBook unit sales
 
 
604
 
69
  %
 
357
 
3
  %
 
346


 
iMac unit sales
 
 
1,094
 
(16
)%
 
1,301
 
8
  %
 
1,208


 
iBook unit sales
 
 
647
 
(4
)%
 
677
 
14
  %
 
596


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 
 
Total Macintosh unit sales
 
 
3,012
 
(3
)%
 
3,101
 
0
  %
 
3,087


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 

Net sales per Macintosh unit sold (e)
 
$

1,491
 

2
  %
$

1,462
 

3
  %
$

1,426


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 



 

iPod unit sales
 
 

939
 

146
  %
 

381
 

—
 
 

—


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 


 
iPod net sales
 
$
345
 
141
  %
$
143
 
—
 
 
—


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 




Notes:

(a)Other
segments consists of Asia Pacific and FileMaker. Certain net sales in 2002 and 2001 related to recent acquisitions and Internet services have been reclassified from Other
segments net sales to Americas segment net sales to conform to the 2003 presentation. 
24


 

(b)Power
Macintosh figures include server sales.
(c)Net
sales of peripherals and other hardware include sales of iPod, Apple-branded and third-party displays, and other hardware accessories.
(d)Net
sales of software include sales of Apple-branded operating system and application software and sales of third-party software.
(e)Net
sales per Macintosh unit sold is derived by dividing total Macintosh net sales by total Macintosh unit sales. 
Fiscal Year 2003 versus 2002  
Net sales increased $465 million or 8% during 2003 compared to 2002 while Macintosh unit sales declined 3% year-over-year to approximately
3 million units in 2003. Several factors have contributed favorably to net sales during 2003 including: 


•The
Retail segment's net sales grew to $621 million during 2003 from $283 million in 2002, an increase of 119%. While the Company's customers may elect to
purchase product from their local Apple Retail store rather than through other preexisting sales channels in the United States, the Company believes that a substantial portion of the Retail segment's
net sales is incremental to total net sales. See additional comments below related to the Retail segment under the heading "Segment Operating Performance."
•Net
sales of peripherals and other hardware rose $384 million or 57% during 2003 compared 2002, which follows a $287 million or 74% increase in 2002 as
compared to 2001. The current year increase was primarily driven by the $202 million, or 141%, year-over-year increase in iPod net sales to $345 million. All of
the Company's operating segments experienced substantial increases in iPod net sales and unit sales during 2003. iPod sales during 2003 were favorably affected by the introduction of substantially
redesigned new models, which are compatible with both Macintosh and Windows operating systems and by the Company's introduction of its iTunes Music Store for the Macintosh operating system in
April 2003. The Company's iPod digital music player is sold by a variety of resellers, many of which do not currently market the Company's Macintosh systems. The Company has expanded this
distribution network during 2003, which has contributed to the current year increase in iPod unit sales of 146%. 

In
addition to the iPod, the increase in net sales of peripherals and other hardware during 2003 also reflects an overall increase in net sales of other computer accessories including AirPort cards
and base stations, which facilitate wireless connectivity; third party digital cameras and printers; and a number of portable computer related accessories. 
•Although
total Macintosh unit sales were down 3% in 2003, unit sales of the Company's portable systems were relatively strong primarily due to the 69% or 247,000 unit
increase in PowerBook unit sales, slightly offset by a 4% or 30,000 unit decrease in iBook unit sales. The increase in PowerBook net sales of $468 million or 56% is due primarily to the success
of the Company's new 12-inch, 15-inch and 17-inch models that were introduced during 2003. The decline in iBook consumer portable sales during 2003 is primarily due
to a lower average price per unit. Portable systems represented 42% of all Macintosh systems sold in 2003 versus 33% in 2002 and 31% in 2001, which reflects an overall industry trend towards portable
systems.
•The
Company's average net sales per Macintosh unit sold increased 2% to $1,491 in 2003 as a result of various changes in overall unit mix towards relatively higher-priced
PowerBook systems and an increase in direct sales primarily from the Company's retail and online stores, offset by somewhat lower year-over-year pricing on comparable Macintosh
systems for most of the Company's Macintosh product lines in response to industry pricing pressure, particularly with the Company's 

25


 


iBook
consumer portable systems. PowerBook and Power Macintosh systems accounted for 42% of total unit sales in 2003 versus 36% in 2002. 


•Net
sales of software increased $55 million or 18% during 2003 compared to the prior year and reflects higher net sales of Apple-branded application and server
software and third-party
software. Net sales of Apple-branded application and server software increased due to the introduction of several new software titles during the year including Final Cut Express, iLife, and Keynote,
as well as from higher sales of software related to recent acquisitions including PowerSchool and Emagic. Growth in net sales of third-party software during 2003 was particularly strong in the
Americas Segment due to strong sales of software by the Company's online store and its Retail segment.
•Service
and other sales rose $69 million or 30% during 2003 and results from significant year-over-year increases in net sales associated with
AppleCare Protection Plan (APP) extended maintenance and support services, as well as the Company's Internet related services. Increased net sales associated with APP are primarily the result of
increasing attach rates over the last several years. Increased net sales associated with Internet services are due to net sales from the iTunes Music Store introduced in April 2003 and
increased net sales of the Company's .Mac Internet service. 

Offsetting
the favorable factors discussed above, the Company's net sales during 2003 were negatively impacted by the following factors: 


•Total
unit sales of desktop systems fell 15% during 2003 compared to 2002. iMac systems unit sales declined 16% from 2003 to 2002 resulting from a shift in sales away from
desktop systems in favor of portables. Also, the current flat panel iMac form factor was in the eighth quarter of its life cycle by the end of 2003 and did not experience significant enhancements
until the release of the 20-inch flat-panel iMac in November 2003.
•Unit
sales of Power Macintosh systems fell 13% during 2003 compared to 2002. For the first nine months of 2003 compared to the same period in 2002, unit sales of Power
Macintosh systems decreased 24%, which is representative of the decline of Power Macintosh systems sales experienced by the Company during recent years and is also believed to be attributable to
delays in purchasing pending the release of the Power Mac G5. As expected, this trend reversed in the fourth quarter of 2003 with unit sales increasing 26% during the quarter as compared to the same
period in the prior year due largely to the new Power Mac G5, which the Company introduced in June 2003 and began shipping at the end of fiscal 2003. The decline in Power Macintosh sales over
the last several years also reflects the shift in sales to portable systems, particularly PowerBooks. In addition, the Company continues to believe that weak economic conditions over the past several
years are having a pronounced negative impact on its professional and creative customers. Additionally, some of the Company's professional and creative customers may have delayed upgrades of their
systems in anticipation of certain software vendors transitioning their professionally oriented Macintosh software applications to run natively on Mac OS X. Currently there are many applications that
run natively on Mac OS X, including Adobe's PhotoShop 7 and QuarkXPress 6; however, there is no assurance that this will result in additional sales of Macintosh systems, particularly Power Macintosh
units.
•The
Company has continued to experience ongoing weakness in its U.S. education channel during 2003. Net sales and unit sales in U.S. education during 2003 were down 4% and
6%, respectively, as compared to 2002. This decline was due to a decrease in K-12 sales, partially offset by an increase in higher education sales. Net sales declined primarily as a result
of a continued shift in mix away from higher priced Power Macintosh and iMac systems towards lower priced eMac and iBook systems, although the Company did experience a significant increase in sales of
its PowerBook systems primarily to higher education customers. Portable systems accounted for approximately 43% of total unit sales in the education channel during 2003, as compared to approximately
34% in 2002. 

26


 


The
Company's one-to-one (1:1) learning solutions are a complete solution consisting of an iBook portable system for every student and teacher along with a wireless network
connected to a central server. The Company has experienced significant competition in 1:1 learning solutions and, accordingly, has experienced a lower sales price per unit, on average, in these
transactions. 
The
Company believes weakness in its U.S. education channel, particularly K-12, has been caused by multiple factors including funding pressures due to weak economic conditions, large
budget deficits in many states, and increased competition particularly for desktop computers. Although the Company has taken steps, and will continue to take steps, to address weakness in the U.S.
education channel, it remains difficult to anticipate when and if this negative trend will reverse. 


•The
personal computer industry in general, and the Company specifically, continue to see relatively soft demand for their products. Sales of professional and consumer
oriented Macintosh systems remain far below levels experienced in fiscal 2000 and earlier. Difficult global economic conditions during the past several years exacerbated by the economic and political
uncertainties caused by terrorist activities and the associated international responses have clearly had a pronounced negative effect on the overall demand for the Company's products in virtually all
of its markets. Further, growth in the overall personal computer industry has slowed due to the high market penetration of personal computers and a lengthening of consumer, creative, and business
personal computer upgrade cycles. 

Fiscal Year 2002 versus 2001  
Net sales increased $379 million or 7% during 2002 compared to 2001, while Macintosh unit sales were relatively flat year-over-year at
approximately 3.1 million units. On a geographic basis, performance in the domestic market was relatively strong, especially when considering the performance of the Company's Retail segment,
which operated during 2002 exclusively in the United States. However, the European and Japanese markets remained sluggish throughout 2002. The Company's net sales in 2002 were positively influenced by
a number of factors. 


•First,
net sales from software, service, peripherals, and other sources rose $248 million or 26% in 2002 versus 2001. This increase was driven by several factors
including a 28% increase in combined third-party and Apple-branded software sales; $143 million in net sales of iPod, the Company's portable digital music player that was introduced in the
first half of 2002; a 9% increase in the sale of computer accessories; and a 14% increase in service revenue caused primarily by increased revenue associated with extended maintenance and support
contracts. The growth in software revenue was primarily the result of increased sales of third-party software in the Company's retail and online stores and expansion in recent years in the number of
Apple-branded software titles.
•Second,
overall unit sales of Macintosh portable systems grew by 92,000 units or 10% in 2002 reflecting a general trend in the personal computer market away from desktop
systems towards portable systems. During 2002, portable Macintosh systems represented 33% of total systems sales versus 31% in 2001 and 20% in 2000. Growth in this area has been most pronounced for
iBook, the Company's education and consumer oriented portable Macintosh system. iBook unit sales increased 14% in 2002 and 9% in 2001.
•Third,
the Company's Retail segment grew from 8 stores at the end of 2001 to 40 stores at the end of 2002. The Retail segment's net sales grew from $19 million in
2001 to $283 million in 2002. While the Retail segment may have cannibalized some net sales from the Company's preexisting sales channels in the U.S., the Company believed that a substantial
portion of the Retail segment's net sales was incremental to the Company's total net sales. See additional comments below related to the Retail segment under the heading "Segment Operating
Performance." 

27







  


•Fourth,
the Company's average unit pricing increased 3% during 2002 as a result of various changes in overall unit mix offset by somewhat lower pricing
year-over-year on comparative Macintosh systems. Net sales per Macintosh unit sold during 2002 of $1,462 per unit reflected the shift in mix towards relatively higher-priced
portable Macintosh systems and reflected the impact on net sales of the relatively higher-priced new iMac design introduced during 2002. The impact of these changes in mix were offset by the decline
in unit sales of relatively higher-priced Power Macintosh systems and by lower pricing on comparative Macintosh systems during 2002 for most of the Company's Macintosh product lines in response to
industry pricing pressure.
•Fifth,
any comparison of net sales in 2002 versus 2001 must consider the effect of unusually low net sales during the first quarter of 2001. This was attributable to several
factors at the beginning of 2001, including continued deterioration in worldwide demand for personal computers, rebate programs and price cuts instituted by the Company during that quarter that cost
the Company approximately $138 million, and a plan implemented by the Company during the first quarter of 2001 that reduced substantially the level of inventory in its distribution channels
that resulted in a decline in channel inventory of approximately 300,000 units during that quarter. 

Offsetting
the favorable factors discussed above, the Company's net sales in 2002 were negatively impacted by several notable factors. 


•First,
unit sales of Power Macintosh systems fell 18% during 2002 as compared to 2001. This followed a 35% decline in Power Macintosh unit sales in 2001 from 2000. The
Company believed that weak economic conditions over the past several years had a pronounced negative impact on its professional and creative customers and that many of these customers continued to
delay upgrades of their Power Macintosh systems due to the Company's ongoing transition to Mac OS X, its new operating system, and in anticipation of certain software vendors transitioning their
Macintosh applications to run natively in Mac OS X. Further, the Company did not experience the anticipated increase in Power Macintosh sales that it expected following the introduction
of Adobe's PhotoShop 7 during 2002. Additionally, many professional users may have postponed upgrading their systems until after the introduction of Mac OS X Jaguar released in
the fourth quarter of 2002. Others may have delayed upgrading until after the availability of other professionally oriented software applications for Mac OS X such as QuarkXPress.
•Second,
despite the overall increase in net sales during 2002 in the Americas, the Company continued to see weakness in its U.S. education channel. Total net sales in this
channel fell 15% in 2002 and 4% in 2001. These declines were consistent with industry data that showed the Company losing market share in the U.S. education market in each of the last two fiscal
years. The Company believed this weakness was caused by multiple factors, including increased price competition in this price sensitive market from the Company's competitors who sell Windows-based
personal computers. Additionally, some of the Company's education customers appeared to be delaying technology purchases due to concerns about the overall impact of the weaker economy on their
available funding.
•Third,
the personal computer industry in general and the Company specifically experienced soft demand for its products due to adverse global economic conditions, political
uncertainties, and a lengthening of consumer, creative, and business personal computer upgrade cycles. 

Segment Operating Performance  
The Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company's reportable operating segments are comprised of the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The
Americas segment includes both North and South America, except for the activities of the Company's Retail segment. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa.
The Japan segment includes only Japan, except for the activities of the Company's Retail segment. The Retail segment currently operates 
28


 
Apple-owned
retail stores in the United States and opened its first international store in Tokyo, Japan in the first quarter of 2004. Each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and
software products and similar services. Further information regarding the Company's operating segments may be found in Item 8 of this Form 10-K in the Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements at Note 11, "Segment Information and Geographic Data." 
Americas  
Net sales in the Americas segment during 2003 increased $50 million or 2% compared to 2002. During 2003 and 2002, the Americas segment represented approximately 51% and
55%, respectively, of the Company's total net sales and represented approximately 54% and 56%, respectively, of total Macintosh unit sales. The results of the Americas segment are similar to the
overall results of the Company as they reflect substantially lower unit sales and net sales of Power Macintosh systems and iMac systems, partially offset by increases in unit sales and net sales of
PowerBooks. The net sales of the Americas segment, and the Company in total, also reflect substantially higher sales of peripherals, software, and services during 2003 compared to 2002 due primarily
to higher sales of iPods and
Internet services. The Americas segment has been negatively affected by weakness in its U.S. education channel. As noted above, total net sales and unit sales in the U.S. education channel during 2003
were down 4% and 6%, respectively, compared to the same period in 2002. The Company believes this decline is caused by increased competition in the education market and by a reduction in spending by
U.S. educational institutions due to federal and state funding concerns and tax revenue shortfalls resulting from the weak economy. Additionally, some of the decline during 2003 in net sales and unit
sales of Macintosh systems in the Americas segment may be the result of the operation of the Company's Retail segment whose net sales, all of which occurred within the U.S., increased significantly
during 2003. 
Net
sales for the Americas segment increased 3% or $94 million in 2002 compared to 2001. The Americas segment was negatively affected by a decline in U.S. education sales in 2002 of
$215 million. The Americas segment also experienced a 17% decline in Power Macintosh unit sales. However, outside of the U.S. education channel, unit sales of consumer desktop and portable
systems rebounded from the substantial declines experienced in 2001, rising a combined 31% in 2002. Sales of software, peripherals, and accessories were also up in the Americas during 2002. Growth in
unit sales of consumer oriented systems during 2002 in the Americas is somewhat attributable to the significantly depressed level of net sales experienced in the first quarter of 2001 as discussed
above. However, growth in the Americas was somewhat negatively affected, particularly with respect to consumer-oriented systems, by the significant growth of the Company's Retail segment in the U.S.
More than 70% of the Retail segment's Macintosh unit sales during 2002 were for iMacs and iBooks. 
Europe  
Net sales in Europe increased $58 million or 5% during 2003 as compared to 2002 while Macintosh unit sales declined by 5% during the same period. Europe's operating
results were consistent with the trend experienced in the Americas and by the Company as a whole. Europe experienced weakened demand for Power Macintosh, iMac and iBook systems in 2003, partially
offset by strong demand for PowerBooks whose net sales increased by 48% or $100 million from 2002. Europe also realized increased sales of peripherals, software, and service, primarily
attributable to higher sales of iPods, accessories and APP. 
Economic
conditions in Europe remained weak throughout 2002, and the overall demand for the Company's products in that region remained flat during 2002 versus 2001. Unit sales in Europe for 2002
reflect relatively stronger demand for consumer-oriented products, particularly iBook whose unit sales increased 27% in 2002, offset by declines in Power Macintosh unit sales. 
Japan  
Net sales in Japan decreased $12 million or 2% during 2003 as compared to the same period in 2002, the weakest year-to-date performance of any of
the Company's operating segments. Japan's Macintosh unit 
29


 
sales
were particularly weak in 2003, declining 12%, and were primarily attributable to lower sales of iMac and iBook systems, partially offset by an increase in PowerBook sales as well as higher
sales of peripherals and other hardware. Japan's Macintosh unit sales remain significantly below the segment's historic levels due to current economic conditions that remain particularly negative in
Japan. 
Net
sales in Japan remained flat during 2002 versus 2001, with a slight decline in unit sales of 2%. Consistent with the Company's other geographic operating segments, during 2002 Japan showed growth
in unit sales of consumer systems and a decline in unit sales of Power Macintosh systems. Japan's iMac unit sales increased 85% in 2002. However, in the case of Japan the increase in iMac unit
shipments in 2002 versus 2001 was primarily the result of the unusually depressed level of net sales experienced by the Company in the first quarter of 2001 as discussed above. Additionally, net sales
in Japan on a sequential and year-over-year comparative basis generally worsened as 2002 progressed reflecting particularly poor economic conditions in Japan. 
Retail  
The Company opened 25 new retail stores during 2003, bringing the total number of open stores to 65 as of September 27, 2003, which compares to 40 open stores as of
September 28, 2002 and 8 open stores as of September 29, 2001. During the first quarter of fiscal 2004, the Company opened 9 additional stores including its first international store in
the Ginza in Tokyo, Japan. The Retail segment's net sales grew to $621 million during 2003 from $283 million in 2002 and from $19 million in 2001. The $338 million or 119%
increase in net sales during 2003 reflects the impact from opening 25 new stores in 2003, the full year impact of 2002 store openings, as well as an increase in average revenue per store. Total
Macintosh sales increased by approximately $170 million of which $108 million related to year-over-year increases in PowerBook sales. The Retail segment has also
contributed strongly to the increases in net sales of peripherals, software and services experienced by the Company during 2003. During 2003, approximately 45% of the Retail segment's net sales came
from the sale of Apple-branded and third-party peripherals, software and services as compared to 28% for the Company as a whole. With an average of 54 stores open during 2003, the Retail segment
achieved annualized revenue per store of approximately $11.5 million, as compared to approximately $10.2 million based on an average of 28 stores open in 2002. 
As
measured by the Company's operating segment reporting, the Retail segment improved from a loss of $22 million during 2002 to a loss of $5 million during 2003. This improvement is
primarily attributable to the segment's year-over-year increase in net sales, which resulted in higher leverage on occupancy, depreciation and other fixed costs. 
Expansion
of the Retail segment has required and will continue to require a substantial investment in fixed assets and related infrastructure, operating lease commitments, personnel, and other
operating expenses. Capital expenditures associated with the Retail segment since its inception totaled approximately $290 million through the end of fiscal 2003, $92 million of which
was incurred during 2003. As of September 27, 2003, the Retail segment had approximately 1,300 employees and had outstanding operating lease commitments associated with retail store space and
related facilities of $354 million. The Company would incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate its Retail segment or close individual stores. Such costs could adversely affect the
Company's results of operations and financial condition. Investment in a new business model such as the Retail segment is inherently risky, particularly in light of the significant investment
involved, the current economic climate, and the fixed nature of a substantial portion of the Retail segment's operating expenses. 
30


 

Gross Margin  
Gross margin for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003 are as follows (in millions, except gross margin percentages): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Net sales
 
$
6,207
 
$
5,742
 
$
5,363
 


Cost of sales
 
 
4,499
 
 
4,139
 
 
4,128
 


 
 

 

 

 


Gross margin
 
$
1,708
 
$
1,603
 
$
1,235
 


 
 

 

 

 


Gross margin percentage
 
 
27.5
%
 
27.9
%
 
23.0
%



Gross
margin decreased to 27.5% of net sales in 2003 from 27.9% of net sales in 2002. This decline in gross margin reflects relatively aggressive pricing actions on several Macintosh models instituted
by the Company beginning in late fiscal 2002 as a result of continued pricing pressure throughout the personal computer industry, lower sales of relatively higher margin Power Macintosh systems during
the first three fiscal quarters of 2003, and increased air freight and manufacturing costs associated with the production ramp-up of the new Power Mac G5 and 15-inch
PowerBook, both of which began shipping in volume during September 2003. This decline is also attributable to a rise in certain component costs as the year progressed. The aforementioned
negative factors affecting gross margins during 2003 were partially offset by the increase in higher margin software and direct sales. 
The
Company anticipates that its gross margin and the gross margin of the overall personal computer industry will remain under pressure throughout fiscal 2004 in light of weak economic conditions,
price competition in the personal computer industry, and potential increases in component pricing. The Company also expects to continue to incur air freight charges on the Power Mac G5 and
other products during 2004. 
The
foregoing statements regarding the Company's expected gross margin during 2004, general demand for personal computers, anticipated industry component pricing, anticipated air freight charges, and
future economic conditions are forward-looking. There can be no assurance that current gross margins will be maintained, targeted gross margin levels will be achieved, or current margins on existing
individual products will be maintained. In general, gross margins and margins on individual products will remain under significant downward pressure due to a variety of factors, including continued
industry wide global pricing pressures, increased competition, compressed product life cycles, potential increases in the cost and availability of raw material and outside manufacturing services, and
potential changes to the Company's product mix, including higher unit sales of consumer products with lower average selling prices and lower gross margins. In response to these downward pressures, the
Company expects it will continue to take pricing actions with respect to its products. Gross margins could also be affected by the Company's ability to effectively manage product quality and warranty
costs and to stimulate demand for certain of its products. The Company's operating strategy and pricing take into account anticipated changes in foreign currency exchange rates over time; however, the
Company's results of operations can be significantly affected in the short-term by fluctuations in exchange rates. 
The
Company orders components for its products and builds inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes, there
is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third-parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products or components. The Company's operating results and
financial condition in the past have been and may in the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and outstanding purchase commitments and to
respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. 
Gross
margin increased to 27.9% of net sales in 2002 from 23.0% in 2001. Gross margin in 2001 was unusually low resulting from negative gross margin of 2% experienced in the first quarter of 2001. As
a 
31


 

percentage
of net sales, the Company's quarterly gross margins declined during fiscal 2002 from 31% in the first quarter down to 26% in the fourth quarter. This decline resulted from several factors
including a rise in component costs as the year progressed and aggressive pricing by the Company across its products lines instituted as a result of continued pricing pressures in the personal
computer industry. 
Operating Expenses  
Operating expenses for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003 are as follows (in millions, except for percentages): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Research and development
 
$
471
 
$
446
 
$
430
 


 
Percentage of net sales
 
 
8
%
 
8
%
 
8
%


Selling, general, and administrative expenses
 
$
1,212
 
$
1,109
 
$
1,138
 


 
Percentage of net sales
 
 
20
%
 
19
%
 
21
%


Restructuring costs
 
$
26
 
$
30
 
 
—
 


Purchased in-process research and development
 
 
—
 
$
1
 
$
11
 



Research and Development (R&D)  
The Company recognizes that focused investments in R&D are critical to its future growth and competitive position in the marketplace and are directly related to timely
development of new and enhanced products that are central to the Company's core business strategy. The Company has historically relied upon innovation to remain competitive. R&D expense amounted to
approximately 8% of total net sales during 2003, 2002 and 2001, up substantially from approximately 5% of total net sales in fiscal year 2000 and recent earlier periods. The Company's management
believes that maintaining or increasing the pace of innovation and product development is the best way to respond to current economic and market conditions and will continue to position the Company
for future growth as conditions improve. R&D expense increased 6% or $25 million to $471 million in 2003 as compared to 2002, which follows a $16 million increase in 2002 as
compared to 2001. The overall increase in R&D expense relates primarily to increased headcount and support for new product development activities. R&D spending also included capitalized software
development costs of approximately $14.7 million related to the development of Mac OS X Panther in 2003; approximately $13.3 million associated with the development of
Mac OS X Jaguar and approximately $6 million associated with the PowerSchool enterprise student information system in 2002; and approximately $5.4 million associated with
the development of the original version of Mac OS X in 2001. Further information related to the Company's capitalization of software development costs may be found in Part II,
Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense (SG&A)  
SG&A increased $103 million or 9% during 2003 as compared to 2002 due primarily to the Company's continued expansion of the Retail segment and increases in headcount.
The overall increase was partially offset by a decrease in current year discretionary spending on marketing and advertising and by savings resulting from the 2003 and 2002 restructuring activities
described below. 
SG&A
decreased $29 million or 3% during 2002 as compared to 2001. The decrease in SG&A in 2002 was primarily the result of lower discretionary spending on marketing and advertising expenses,
decreased spending related to information systems, and benefits directly related to the Company's restructuring actions in 2002 and 2001. The decreases were partially offset by higher sales expense in
2002 resulting from increased operating expenses associated with expansion of the Company's Retail segment. 
32


 

Restructuring Actions  
During the second quarter of 2003, the Company's management approved and initiated restructuring actions that resulted in recognition of a total restructuring charge of
$2.8 million. The primary focus of actions taken in the second quarter were for the most part supplemental to actions initiated in the prior two quarters and focused on further headcount
reductions in various sales and marketing functions in the Company's Americas and Europe operating segments and further reductions associated with PowerSchool related activities in the Americas
operating segment. The second quarter actions resulted in recognition of severance costs of $2.4 million for termination of 93 employees, 92 of whom were terminated prior to the end of 2003 at
a cost of $2.2 million. During the second quarter of 2003, an additional $400,000 was accrued for asset write-offs and lease payments on an abandoned facility in the Americas
operating segment. The Company estimates these restructuring actions will reduce quarterly operating expenses by $1.5 million. 
During
the first quarter of 2003, the Company's management approved and initiated restructuring actions with a total cost of $24 million that resulted in the termination of manufacturing
operations at the Company-owned facility in Singapore, further reductions in headcount resulting from the shift in PowerSchool product strategy that took place at the end of fiscal 2002, and
termination of various sales and marketing activities in the United States and Europe. These restructuring actions will ultimately result in the elimination of 260 positions worldwide, all but one was
eliminated by the end of 2003. The Company estimates these restructuring actions will reduce quarterly operating expenses by $6 million. 
During
fiscal 2002, the Company recorded total restructuring charges of $30 million related to actions intended to eliminate certain activities and better align the Company's operating expenses
with existing general economic conditions and to partially offset the cost of continuing investments in new product development and investments in the Company's Retail operating segment. The Company
estimates these restructuring actions will result in reduced quarterly operating expenses of approximately $10 million. 
Of
the $30 million restructuring charge for fiscal 2002, $6 million was incurred in the fourth quarter of 2002 related to actions designed to reduce headcount costs in corporate
operations and sales and to adjust its PowerSchool product strategy. Headcount actions, primarily in corporate operations, sales, and PowerSchool related research and development, resulted in the
elimination of approximately 180 positions worldwide at a cost of $1.8 million. The shift in product strategy at PowerSchool included discontinuing development and marketing of a PowerSchool
product that resulted in the impairment of previously capitalized development costs associated with the product in the amount of $4.5 million. The remaining charge in 2002 of $24 million
was incurred in the first quarter of 2002 and resulted in the elimination of approximately 425 positions worldwide, at a cost of $8 million. Positions were eliminated primarily in the Company's
operations, information systems, and administrative functions. In addition, these restructuring actions also included significant changes in the Company's information systems strategy resulting in
termination of equipment leases and cancellation of existing projects and activities. Related lease and contract cancellation charges totaled $12 million, and charges for asset impairments
totaled $4 million. During the first quarter of 2003, the Company reversed the remaining unused accrual of $600,000. 
Purchased In-Process Research and Development (IPR&D)  
During the fourth quarter of 2002, the Company acquired Emagic GmbH, a provider of professional software solutions for computer based music production, for approximately
$30 million in cash; $551,000 of which was allocated to IPR&D. The amount of the purchase price allocated to IPR&D was expensed upon acquisition, because the technological feasibility of
products under development had not been established and no alternative future uses existed. The IPR&D relates primarily to Emagic's Logic series technology and extensions. At the date of the
acquisition, the products under development were between 43%-83% complete, and it was expected that the remaining work would be completed during the Company's fiscal 2003 at a cost of
approximately $415,000. The remaining efforts, which were completed in 2003, included finalizing user interface design and development, and testing. The fair value of the IPR&D was determined 
33


 
using
the income approach, which reflects the projected free cash flows that will be generated by the IPR&D projects and that are attributable to the acquired technology, and discounting the projected
net cash flows back to their present value using a discount rate of 25%. 
In
May 2001, the Company acquired PowerSchool, Inc., a provider of web-based student information systems for K-12 schools and districts that enables schools to
record, access, report, and manage their student data and performance in real-time, and gives parents real-time web access to track their children's progress. Of total purchase
consideration of $66.1 million, $10.8 million was allocated to IPR&D and was expensed upon acquisition because the technological feasibility of products under development had not been
established and no alternative future uses existed. The IPR&D relates to technologies representing processes and expertise employed to design, develop, and deploy a functioning, scalable
web-based student information system for use by K-12 schools. At the date of the acquisition, the PowerSchool product under development was approximately 50% complete, and it
was expected that the remaining 50% would be completed during the Company's fiscal 2002 at a cost of approximately $9.25 million. The remaining efforts, which were completed during 2002,
included completion of coding, finalizing user interface design and development, and testing. The fair value of the IPR&D was determined using the income approach, which reflects the projected free
cash flows that will be generated by the IPR&D projects and that are attributable to the acquired technology, and discounting the projected net cash flows back to their present value using a discount
rate of 25%. 
Other Income and Expense  
Other income and expense for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003 are as follows (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Gains (losses) on non-current investments, net
 
$
10
 
$
(42
)
$
88
 


Unrealized loss on convertible securities
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
(13
)



Interest income
 
$

69
 
$

118
 
$

218
 


Interest expense
 
 
(8
)
 
(11
)
 
(16
)


Gains on sales of short term investments, net
 
 
21
 
 
7
 
 
—
 


Other income (expense), net
 
 
(5
)
 
(2
)
 
15
 


Gain on forward purchase agreement
 
 
6
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 

 

 

 


Interest and other income, net
 
$
83
 
$
112
 
$
217
 


 
 

 

 

 


Total other income and expense
 
$
93
 
$
70
 
$
292
 


 
 

 

 

 



Gains and Losses on Non-current Investments  
The Company has held investments in EarthLink Inc. (EarthLink), Akamai Technologies, Inc. (Akamai), ARM Holdings plc (ARM) and certain investments in private
companies. These investments have been reflected in the consolidated balance sheets as long term assets within other assets and have been categorized as available-for-sale
requiring that they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. The Company recognizes an
impairment charge to earnings in the event a decline in fair value below the cost basis of one of these investments is determined to be other-than-temporary. The Company
includes recognized gains and losses resulting from the sale or from other-than-temporary declines in fair value associated with these investments in other income and expense.
Further information related to the Company's non-current debt and equity investments may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Note 2 of
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
During
2003, the Company sold 1,875,000 shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of approximately $9 million, and a gain before taxes of approximately $8 million. Additionally, the
Company sold its remaining investment in ARM stock, 278,000 shares, for net proceeds of approximately $295,000, and a 
34


 

gain
before taxes of $270,000, and sold its remaining investment in EarthLink stock, 6,540,000 shares, for net proceeds of approximately $37 million, and a gain before taxes of
$2 million. The fair value of the Company's remaining investment in Akamai as of September 27, 2003, was approximately $5 million. 
During
2002, the Company determined that declines in the fair value of certain of these investments were other-than-temporary. As a result, the Company recognized a
$44 million charge to earnings to writedown the basis of its investment in EarthLink, a $6 million charge to earnings to writedown the basis of its investment in Akamai, and a
$15 million charge to earnings to writedown the basis of its investment in a private company investment. These losses in 2002 were partially offset by the sale of 117,000 shares of EarthLink
stock for net proceeds of $2 million and a gain before taxes of $223,000, the sale of 250,000 shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of $2 million and a gain before taxes of $710,000,
and the sale of approximately 4.7 million shares of ARM stock for both net proceeds and a gain before taxes of $21 million. 
During
2001, the Company sold a total of approximately 1 million shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of $39 million and recorded a gain before taxes of $36 million, and sold a
total of approximately 29.8 million shares of ARM stock for net proceeds of $176 million and recorded a gain before taxes of $174 million. These gains during 2001 were partially
offset by a $114 million charge to earnings that reflected an other-than-temporary decline in the fair value of the Company's investment in EarthLink and an
$8 million charge that reflected an other-than-temporary decline in the fair value of certain private company investments. 
Unrealized Loss on Convertible Securities  
On October 1, 2000, the Company adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standard (SFAS) No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments
and Hedging Activities. SFAS No. 133 established accounting and reporting standards for derivative instruments, hedging activities, and exposure definition. SFAS
No. 133 required the Company to adjust the carrying value of the derivative component of its investment in Samsung to earnings during the first quarter of 2001, the before tax effect of which
was an unrealized loss of approximately $13 million. 
Interest and Other Income, Net  
Net interest and other income decreased $29 million or 26% to $83 million during 2003. The decrease is primarily the result of declining investment yields on the
Company's cash and short-term investments resulting from substantially lower market interest rates. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its cash, cash equivalents
and short-term investments fell to 1.89% in 2003 compared to 2.85% in 2002. The decrease is offset by the increase of $14 million from the gain on the sales of short term
investments from the Company's fixed income portfolio, and the increase of $6 million from the gain on the forward purchase agreement during the fourth quarter of 2003. 
Net
interest and other income was $112 million in fiscal 2002, compared to $217 million in fiscal 2001. This $105 million or 48% decrease was primarily the result of declining
investment yields on the Company's cash and short-term investments resulting from substantially lower market interest rates. The weighted average interest rate earned by the Company on its
cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments fell to 2.85% in 2002 compared to 5.38% in 2001. 
Provision for Income Taxes  
The Company's effective tax rate for 2003 was 26% compared to the higher statutory rate due primarily to research and development credits, a non-taxable gain on
stock repurchase and certain undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes were provided. As of September 27, 2003, the Company had deferred tax assets arising from deductible
temporary differences, tax losses, and tax credits of $452 million before being offset against certain deferred tax liabilities and a valuation allowance for presentation on the Company's
consolidated balance sheet. As of September 27, 2003, a valuation allowance of $30 million was 
35


 
recorded
against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of tax losses that may not be realized. The valuation allowance relates principally to the operating loss carryforwards acquired from NeXT and
other acquisitions, the utilization of which is subject to certain limitations imposed by the Internal Revenue Code. Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including
income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining net deferred tax assets. The Company will continue to evaluate the
realizability of the deferred tax assets quarterly by assessing the need for and amount of the valuation allowance. 
On
April 10, 2003, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) proposed adjustments to the Company's federal income tax returns for the years 1998 through 2000, and the Company has made certain
prepayments thereon. Certain of these adjustments are being contested through the IRS Appeals Office. Substantially all IRS audit issues for years prior to 1998 have been resolved. Management believes
that adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. Should any issues addressed in
the Company's tax audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with management's expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution
occurs. 
Cumulative Effects of Accounting Changes  
Financial Instruments with Characteristics of Both Liabilities and Equity  
On May 15, 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued SFAS No. 150, Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with
Characteristics of Both Liabilities and Equity. SFAS No. 150 requires issuers to classify as liabilities certain freestanding financial instruments that embody
obligations for the issuer and have characteristics of both liabilities and equity. The Company adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 150 on June 29, 2003, which resulted in a favorable
cumulative effect type adjustment of approximately $3 million. This adjustment represented the mark-to-market adjustment to fair value for a forward purchase agreement
that allowed the Company to acquire 1.5 million shares of its common stock at a price of
$16.64 per share. The Company settled this forward purchase agreement in August 2003. The settlement resulted in an additional gain of approximately $6 million, which is included in
interest and other income, net. 
Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations  
On September 29, 2002, the Company adopted SFAS No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations, which
addresses financial accounting and reporting for obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement costs. Net of the related
income tax effect of approximately $1 million, adoption of SFAS No. 143 resulted in an unfavorable cumulative-effect type adjustment to net income during 2003 of approximately
$2 million. This adjustment represents cumulative depreciation and accretion that would have been recognized through the date of adoption of SFAS No. 143 had the statement been applied
to the Company's existing asset retirement obligations at the time they were initially incurred. 
Accounting for Derivatives  
The adoption of SFAS 133 during 2001 resulted in a favorable cumulative-effect type adjustment of approximately $12 million, net of a related income tax effect of
approximately $5 million. 
Further
information related to the adoption of SFAS Nos. 133, 143 and 150 and the resulting cumulative accounting effects may be found in Part II, Item 8 of this
Form 10-K at Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation  
The Company currently measures compensation expense for its employee stock-based compensation plans using the intrinsic value method prescribed by Accounting Principles Board
(APB) Opinion No. 25, 
36


 
 Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees and provides pro forma disclosures of the effect on net income and earnings per share as if the fair value-based method had been
applied in measuring compensation expense. The Company has elected to follow APB Opinion No. 25 because, as further discussed in Part II, Item 8 of this
Form 10-K at Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the alternative fair value accounting provided for under SFAS No. 123,  Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation,
requires use of option valuation models that were not developed for use in valuing employee stock options and
employee stock purchase plan shares. Under APB Opinion No. 25, when the exercise price of the Company's employee stock options equals the market price of the underlying stock on the date of the
grant, no compensation expense is recognized. 
The
FASB decided on April 22, 2003 to require all companies to expense the value of employee stock options. Companies will be required to measure the cost of employee stock options according to
their fair value. The FASB has indicated that it plans to issue in the first quarter of calendar year 2004 an exposure draft of a new accounting standard addressing this matter. Prior to issuance of
this exposure draft, the FASB has indicated it will be addressing several significant technical issues. Among other things, the FASB must determine the extent to which the new accounting standard will
permit adjustments to recognized expense for actual option forfeitures and actual performance outcomes. This determination will affect the timing and amount of compensation expense recognized. Also, a
method to determine the fair value of employee stock options must be established. Current accounting standards require use of an option-pricing model, such as the Black-Scholes formula, to determine
fair value and provide guidance on adjusting some of the input factors used in the model. This valuation approach has received significant criticism and may be subject to changes that could have a
significant impact on the calculated fair value of employee stock options under the new standard. 
At
the Company's annual shareholder's meeting on April 24, 2003, shareholders approved a proposal requesting that the Company's Board of Directors (the Board) establish a policy of expensing
the value of all future employee stock options issued by the Company. The Board and management appreciate and take seriously the views expressed by the Company's shareholders. As discussed in the
Company's Form 10-Q for the period ended March 29, 2003, the Company had decided not to expense the value of employee stock options until the FASB finalizes its new
accounting standard on the matter. The Company based this decision on the FASB's announced intention to soon require all companies to expense the value of employee stock options and the FASB's
near-term review of technical issues that will play a significant role in determining the fair value of and accounting for employee stock options. The Company monitors progress at the FASB
and other developments with respect to the general issue of employee stock compensation. In the future, should the Company expense the value of employee stock options, either out of choice or due to
new requirements issued by the FASB, the Company may have to recognize substantially more compensation expense in future periods that could have a material adverse impact on the Company's future
results of operations. 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements  
In January 2003, the FASB issued Interpretation No. 46 (FIN 46), Consolidation of Variable Interest
Entities. FIN 46 clarifies the application of Accounting Research Bulletin No. 51 and applied immediately to any variable interest entities created after
January 31, 2003 and to variable interest entities in which an interest is obtained after that date. For variable interest entities created or acquired prior to February 1, 2003, the
provisions of FIN 46 must be applied for the first interim or annual period beginning after December 15, 2003. The adoption of the provision of FIN 46 related to variable
interests created after January 31, 2003 did not have a material impact on the Company's results of operations or financial position. The Company continues to evaluate the provisions of
FIN 46, and does not believe that the adoption of the remaining provisions will have a material impact on its results of operations or financial position. 
37



  


In May 2003, the FASB's Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) reached consensus on EITF Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple
Deliverables. EITF Issue No. 00-21 provides guidance on how to account for certain arrangements that involve the delivery or performance of multiple
products, services, and/or rights to use assets. The provisions of EITF Issue No. 00-21 apply to revenue transactions entered into in fiscal periods beginning after June 15,
2003. Additionally, in August 2003, the EITF reached consensus on EITF Issue No. 03-5, Applicability of AICPA Statement of
Position 97-2, "Software Revenue Recognition," to Non-Software Deliverables in an Arrangement Containing More-than-Incidental
Software. EITF Issue No. 03-5 provides guidance on determining whether non-software deliverables are included within the scope of
SOP 97-2, and accordingly, whether multiple element arrangements are to be accounted for in accordance with EITF Issue No. 00-21 or SOP 97-2.
The Company currently applies the requirements of SOP No. 97-2 when accounting for all multiple element transactions. The Company does not anticipate the application of either EITF
Issue Nos. 00-21 or 03-5 will have a significant impact on its results of operations or financial position. 
Liquidity and Capital Resources  
The following table presents selected financial information and statistics for each of the last three fiscal years (dollars in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001


Cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
 
$
4,566
 
$
4,337
 
$
4,336


Accounts receivable, net
 
$
766
 
$
565
 
$
466


Inventory
 
$
56
 
$
45
 
$
11


Working capital
 
$
3,530
 
$
3,730
 
$
3,625


Days sales in accounts receivable (DSO) (a)
 
 
41
 
 
36
 
 
29


Days of supply in inventory (b)
 
 
4
 
 
4
 
 
1


Days payables outstanding (DPO) (c)
 
 
82
 
 
77
 
 
73


Annual operating cash flow
 
$
289
 
$
89
 
$
185






(a)DSO
is based on ending net trade receivables and most recent quarterly net sales for each period.
(b)Days
supply of inventory is based on ending inventory and most recent quarterly cost of sales for each period.
(c)DPO
is based on ending accounts payable and most recent quarterly cost of sales adjusted for the change in inventory. 

As
of September 27, 2003, the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments portfolio totaled $4.566 billion, an increase of $229 million from the end
of fiscal 2002. The Company's short-term investment portfolio consists primarily of investments in U.S. Treasury and Agency securities, U.S. corporate securities, and foreign securities.
Foreign securities consist primarily of foreign commercial paper, certificates of deposit and time deposits with foreign
institutions, most of which are denominated in U.S. dollars. The Company's investments are generally liquid and investment grade. 
As
a result of declining investment yields on the Company's cash equivalents and short-term investments resulting from substantially lower market interest rates during 2003, the Company
has elected to reduce the average maturity of its portfolio to maintain liquidity for future investment opportunities when market interest rates increase. Accordingly, during 2003 the Company
increased its holdings in short-term investment grade instruments, both in U.S. corporate and foreign securities, that are classified as cash equivalents and has reduced its holdings in
longer-term U.S. corporate securities classified as short-term investments. 
Although
the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased in 2003, the Company's working capital at September 27, 2003 decreased by $200 million as
compared to the end of 
38


 

fiscal
2002 due primarily to the current year reclassification of the Company's long-term debt as a current obligation resulting from its scheduled maturity in February 2004. 
The
primary sources of total cash and cash equivalents in fiscal 2003 were $289 million in cash generated by operating activities and $53 million in proceeds from the issuance of common
stock, partially offset by $164 million utilized for capital expenditures and $26 million for the repurchase of common stock. 
The
Company believes its existing balances of cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will be sufficient to satisfy its working capital needs, capital expenditures, debt
obligations, stock repurchase activity, outstanding commitments, and other liquidity requirements associated with its existing operations over the next 12 months. 
Debt  
The Company currently has debt outstanding in the form of $300 million of aggregate principal amount 6.5% unsecured notes that were originally issued in 1994. The notes,
which pay interest semiannually, were sold at 99.925% of par, for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. The notes, along with approximately $4 million of unamortized deferred gains on closed
interest rate swaps, are due in February 2004 and therefore have been classified as current debt as of September 27, 2003. The Company currently anticipates utilizing its existing cash
balances to settle these notes when due. 
Capital Expenditures  
The Company's total capital expenditures were $164 million during fiscal 2003, $92 million of which were for retail store facilities and equipment related to the
Company's Retail segment and $72 million of which were primarily for corporate infrastructure, including information systems enhancements and operating facilities enhancements and expansions.
The Company currently anticipates it will utilize approximately $160 million for capital expenditures during 2004, approximately $85 million of which is expected to be utilized for
further expansion of the Company's Retail segment and the remainder utilized to support normal replacement of existing capital assets and enhancements to general information technology infrastructure. 
Stock Repurchase Plan  
In July 1999, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a plan for the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This repurchase plan does
not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. 
During
the fourth quarter of 2001, the Company entered into a forward purchase agreement to acquire 1.5 million shares of its common stock in September of 2003 at an average price of $16.64 per
share for a total cost of $25.5 million. In August 2003, the Company settled this agreement prior to its maturity, at which time the Company's common stock had a fair value of $22.81.
Other than this forward purchase transaction, the Company has not engaged in any transactions to repurchase its common stock since fiscal 2000. Since inception of the stock repurchase plan, the
Company had repurchased a total of 6.55 million shares at a cost of $217 million. The Company was still authorized to repurchase up to an additional $283 million of its common
stock as of September 27, 2003. 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements  
The Company has not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby the Company has financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative
instruments or other contingent arrangements that expose the Company to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligation under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity
that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to the Company. 
39


 
Lease Commitments  
As of September 27, 2003, the Company had total outstanding commitments on noncancelable operating leases of approximately $600 million, $354 million of
which related to the lease of retail space and related facilities. Remaining terms on the Company's existing operating leases range from 1 to 12 years. Subsequent to September 27, 2003,
the Company entered into additional operating lease commitments for retail space with future lease commitments totaling $64 million for periods ranging from 10 to 12 years. 
Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Component Suppliers  
The Company utilizes several contract manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies for the Company's products and to perform final assembly and test of finished
products. These contract manufacturers acquire components and build product based on demand information supplied by the Company, which typically covers periods ranging from 1 to 3 months. The
Company also obtains individual components for its products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, the Company acquires components through a combination of
purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the Company's forecasted component and manufacturing requirements
for periods ranging from 30 to 130 days. As of September 27, 2003, the Company had outstanding third-party manufacturing commitments and component purchase commitments of approximately
$848 million. 
Indemnifications  
The Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party
intellectual property rights. Other licensing agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in
the event of an infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement
claim asserted against itself or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a potential liability related to unresolved infringement claims that would have a material
adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity or results of operations. 
Factors That May Affect Future Results and Financial Condition  
Because of the following factors, as well as other factors affecting the Company's operating results and financial condition, past financial performance should not be
considered to be a reliable indicator of future performance, and investors should not use historical trends to anticipate results or trends in future periods. 
General economic conditions and current economic and political uncertainty could adversely affect the demand for the Company's products and the financial health of its
suppliers, distributors, and resellers.  
The Company's operating performance depends significantly on general economic conditions. For much of the past several years, demand for the Company's products has been
negatively impacted by difficult global economic conditions. Additionally, some of the Company's education customers appear to be delaying technology purchases due to concerns about the overall impact
of the weaker economy on their available funding. Continued uncertainty about future economic conditions continues to make it difficult to forecast future operating results. Should global and regional
economic conditions fail to improve or continue to deteriorate, demand for the Company's products could continue to be adversely affected, as could the financial health of its suppliers, distributors,
and resellers. 
War, terrorism or public health issues could disrupt supply, delivery or demand of products which could negatively affect the Company's operations and performance.  
War, terrorism or public health issues, whether in the U.S. or abroad, have caused and could continue to cause damage or disruption to international commerce by creating
economic and political uncertainties 
40


 
that
may have a strong negative impact on the global economy, the Company, and the Company's suppliers or customers. Although it is impossible to predict the occurrences or consequences of any such
events, such events could result in a decrease in demand for the Company's products, make it difficult or impossible to deliver products to its customers, or to receive components from its suppliers,
and could create delays and inefficiencies in the Company's supply chain. The Company's operating results and financial condition have been, and in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by
these events. 
The
Company and some of its manufacturing vendors and component suppliers have significant operations in various locations throughout Asia, including locations in mainland China, the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, and Singapore, all of which were subject to the World Health Organization and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) travel
advisories at times during the second and third quarters of fiscal 2003. Similar travel advisories were issued for Taiwan, where a significant amount of the Company's portable Macintosh systems and
the iPod are assembled. Should the severity of the SARs threat increase or other public health issues arise, the Company could be negatively impacted by the need for more stringent employee travel
restrictions, additional limitations in the availability of freight services, governmental actions limiting the movement of products between various regions, delays in production ramps of new
products, and disruptions in the operations of the Company's manufacturing vendors and component suppliers. 
The market for personal computers and related peripherals and services is highly competitive. If the Company is unable to effectively compete in these markets, its results of
operations could be adversely affected.  
The personal computer industry is highly competitive and is characterized by aggressive pricing practices, downward pressure on gross margins, frequent introduction of new
products, short product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual improvement in product price/performance characteristics, rapid adoption of technological and product advancements by
competitors, price sensitivity on the part of consumers, and a large number of competitors. Over the past several years, price competition in the market for personal computers and related peripherals
has been particularly intense. The Company's competitors who sell Windows-based personal computers have aggressively cut prices and lowered their product margins in order to gain or maintain market
share in response to the weakness in demand that began in the second half of calendar 2000 for personal computing products. The Company's results of operations and financial condition have been, and
in the future may continue to be, adversely affected by these and other industry-wide pricing pressures and downward pressures on gross margins. 
The
personal computer industry has also been characterized by rapid technological advances in software functionality, hardware performance, and features based on existing or emerging industry
standards. Further, as the personal computer industry and its customers place more reliance on the Internet, an increasing number of Internet devices that are smaller and simpler than traditional
personal computers may compete for market share with the Company's existing products. Several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target certain of the
Company's key market segments, including consumer, education, professional and consumer digital video editing, and design and publishing. Several of the Company's competitors have introduced or
announced plans to introduce digital music products that mimic many of the unique design, technical features, and solutions of the Company's products. The Company has a significant number of
competitors, many of whom have greater financial, marketing, manufacturing, and technological resources, as well as broader product lines and larger installed customer bases than those of the Company.
Additionally, there has been a trend towards consolidation in the personal computer industry that has resulted in larger and potentially stronger competitors in the Company's markets. 
The
Company is currently the only maker of hardware using the Mac OS. The Mac OS has a minority market share in the personal computer market, which is dominated by makers of computers utilizing
Microsoft's Windows operating systems. The Company's future operating results and financial condition 
41


 

are
substantially dependent on its ability to continue to develop improvements to the Macintosh platform in order to maintain perceived design and functional advantages over competing platforms,
including Windows. 
The
Company is currently focused on market opportunities related to digital music distribution and related consumer electronic devices including iPods. The Company faces increasing competition from
other companies promoting their own digital music distribution services, free peer-to-peer music services, emerging companies, and larger companies that may have greater
resources, including technical and marketing resources, and supplier relationships. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to provide products and services that effectively compete in
these markets. Failure to effectively compete could negatively affect the Company's operating results and financial position. 
The Company has higher research and development and selling, general and administrative costs, as a percentage of revenue, than many of its competitors.  
The Company's ability to compete successfully and maintain attractive gross margins is heavily dependent upon its ability to ensure a continuing and timely flow of innovative
and competitive products and technologies to the marketplace. As a result, the Company incurs higher research and development costs as a percentage of revenue than its competitors who sell personal
computers based on other operating systems. Many of these competitors seek to compete aggressively on price and maintain very low cost structures. Further, as a result of the expansion of the
Company's Retail segment and costs associated with marketing the Company's brand including its unique operating system, the Company incurs higher selling costs as a percentage of revenue than many of
its competitors. If the Company is unable to continue to develop and sell innovative new products with attractive gross margins, its results of operations may be materially adversely affected by its
operating cost structure. 
The Company must successfully manage frequent product introductions and transitions in order to remain competitive and effectively stimulate customer demand.  
Due to the highly volatile nature of the personal computer industry, which is characterized by dynamic customer demand patterns and rapid technological advances, the Company
must continually introduce new products and technologies, enhance existing products in order to remain competitive, and effectively stimulate customer demand for new products and upgraded versions of
the Company's existing products. The success of new product introductions is dependent on a number of factors, including market acceptance; the Company's ability to manage the risks associated with
product transitions, including production ramp issues; the availability of application software for new products; the effective management of inventory levels in line with anticipated product demand;
the availability of products in appropriate quantities to meet anticipated demand; and the risk that new products may have quality or other defects in the early stages of introduction. Accordingly,
the Company cannot determine in advance the ultimate effect that new products will have on its sales or results of operations. 
During
2001, the Company introduced a new client operating system, Mac OS X, and delivered its first major upgrade, Mac OS X version 10.1. Other major upgrades include Mac OS X Jaguar in 2002 and most
recently Mac OS X Panther in October 2003. Inability of the Company to provide additional improvements in the performance and functionality of Mac OS X, advance customer acceptance of the new
operating system and its upgrades, obtain the continued commitment of software developers to transition existing applications to run on Mac OS X, or create new applications to run on Mac OS X, may
have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and financial condition. 
Because orders for components, and in some cases commitments to purchase components, must be placed in advance of customer orders, the Company faces substantial inventory risk.  
The Company records a write-down for inventories of components and products that have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or net realizable value
and accrues necessary reserves for cancellation fees of orders for inventories that have been cancelled. Although the Company believes its 
42


 
inventory
and related provisions are adequate, given the rapid and unpredictable pace of product obsolescence in the computer industry, no assurance can be given that the Company will not incur
additional inventory and related charges. In addition, such charges have had, and may have, a material effect on the Company's financial position and results of operations. 
The
Company must order components for its products and build inventory in advance of product shipments. Because the Company's markets are volatile and subject to rapid technology and price changes,
there is a risk the Company will forecast incorrectly and produce or order from third parties excess or insufficient inventories of particular products. Consistent with industry practice, components
are normally acquired through a combination of formal purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Such purchase commitments typically cover the
Company's forecasted component and manufacturing requirements for periods ranging from 30 to 130 days. The Company's operating results and financial condition have been in the past and may in
the future be materially adversely affected by the Company's ability to manage its inventory levels and respond to short-term shifts in customer demand patterns. 
Future operating results are dependent upon the Company's ability to obtain a sufficient supply of components, some of which are in short supply or available only from limited
sources.  
Although most components essential to the Company's business are generally available from multiple sources, certain key components including microprocessors and ASICs are
currently obtained by the Company from single or limited sources. Some key components (including without limitation DRAM, TFT-LCD flat-panel displays, and optical and magnetic
disk drives), while currently available to the Company from multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide availability and pricing pressures. In addition, new products introduced
by the Company often initially utilize custom components obtained from only one source until the Company has evaluated whether there is a need for, and subsequently qualifies, additional suppliers. In
situations where a component or product utilizes new technologies, initial capacity constraints may exist until such time as the suppliers' yields have matured. The Company and other producers in the
personal computer industry also compete for various components with other industries that have experienced increased demand for their products. The Company uses some components that are not common to
the rest of the personal computer industry including certain microprocessors and ASICs. Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the
production of components other than those customized to meet the Company's requirements. If
the supply of a key component were to be delayed or constrained on a new or existing product, the Company's results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. 
The
Company's ability to produce and market competitive products is also dependent on the ability and desire of IBM and Motorola, the sole suppliers of the PowerPC RISC-based
microprocessor for the Company's Macintosh computers, to provide the Company with a sufficient supply of microprocessors with price/performance features that compare favorably to those supplied to the
Company's competitors by Intel Corporation and other developers and producers of microprocessors used by personal computers using other operating systems. Further, despite its efforts to educate the
marketplace to the contrary, the Company believes that many of its current and potential customers believe that the relatively slower MHz rating or clock speed of the microprocessors it utilizes in
its Macintosh systems compares unfavorably to those utilized by other operating systems and translates to slower overall system performance. There have been instances in recent years where the
inability of the Company's suppliers to provide advanced PowerPC G4 and G3 microprocessors with higher clock speeds in sufficient quantity has had significant adverse effects on the Company's results
of operations. In addition, currently IBM is the Company's sole supplier of the G5 processor used in current Power Macintosh products and Motorola is the sole supplier of the G4 processors. The
inability in the future of the Company to obtain microprocessors in sufficient quantities with competitive price/performance features could have an adverse impact on the Company's results of
operations and financial condition. 
43


 

The Company relies on third-party music content, which may not be available to the Company on commercially reasonable terms or at all.  
The Company contracts with third parties to offer their music content to customers through the Company's iTunes Music Store. The Company pays substantial fees to obtain the
rights to offer to its customers this third-party music. Many of the Company's licensing arrangements with these third-party content providers are short-term in nature and do not guarantee
the future renewal of these arrangements at commercially reasonable terms, if at all. Certain parties in the music industry have announced their intent to consolidate their music distribution
operations, which could limit the availability and increase the fees required to offer music content to customers through the iTunes Music Store. If the Company is unable to continue to offer a wide
variety of music content at reasonable prices with acceptable usage rules, or expand its geographic reach outside the United States, then sales and gross margins of the Company's iTunes Music Store as
well as related hardware and peripherals, including iPods, may be adversely affected. 
Third-party
content providers and artists require that the Company provide certain digital rights management solutions and other security mechanisms. If the requirements from content providers or
artists change, then the Company may be required to further develop or license technology to address such new rights and requirements. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to develop or
license such solutions at a reasonable cost and in a timely manner, if at all, which could have a materially adverse affect on the Company's operating results and financial position. 
The Company is dependent on manufacturing and logistics services provided by third parties, many of whom are located outside of the United States.  
Many of the Company's products are manufactured in whole or in part by third-party manufacturers. In addition, the Company has outsourced much of its transportation and
logistics management. While outsourcing arrangements may lower the fixed cost of operations, they also reduce the Company's direct control over production and distribution. It is uncertain what effect
such diminished control will have on the quality or quantity of the products manufactured, or the flexibility of the Company to respond to changing market conditions. Moreover, although arrangements
with such manufacturers may contain provisions for warranty expense reimbursement, the Company may remain at least initially responsible to the ultimate consumer for warranty service in the event of
product defects. Any unanticipated product defect or warranty liability, whether pursuant to arrangements with contract manufacturers or otherwise, could adversely affect the Company's future
operating results and financial condition. 
Final
assembly of products sold by the Company is conducted in the Company's manufacturing facilities in Sacramento, California, and Cork, Ireland, and by external vendors in Fremont, California,
Fullerton, California, Taiwan, Korea, the Netherlands, the People's Republic of China, and the Czech Republic. Currently, manufacture of many of the components used in the Company's products and final
assembly of substantially all of the Company's portable products including PowerBooks, iBooks, and the iPod is performed by third-party vendors in Japan, Taiwan and China. If for any reason
manufacturing or logistics in any of these locations is disrupted by regional economic, business, environmental, medical, political, or military conditions or events, the Company's results of
operations and financial condition could be adversely affected. 
The Company's products, from time to time, experience quality problems that can result in decreased net sales and operating profits.  
The Company sells highly complex hardware and software products that can contain defects in design and manufacture. Sophisticated operating system software and applications,
such as those sold by the Company, often contain "bugs" that can unexpectedly interfere with the operation of the software. Defects may also occur in components and products the Company purchases from
third-parties that may be beyond its control. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to detect and fix all defects in the hardware and software it sells. Failure to do so could result
in lost revenue, loss of reputation, and significant expense to remedy. 
44


 
The Company's retail initiative has required and will continue to require a substantial investment and commitment of resources and is subject to numerous risks and
uncertainties.  
Through November 2003, the Company has opened 74 retail stores including its first international store in Tokyo, Japan. The Company's retail initiative has required
substantial investment in equipment and leasehold improvements, information systems, inventory, and personnel. The Company has also entered into substantial operating lease commitments for retail
space with lease terms ranging from 5 to 15 years. The Company could incur substantial costs should it choose to terminate this initiative or close individual stores. Such costs could adversely
affect the Company's results of operations and financial condition. Additionally, a relatively high proportion of the Retail segment's costs are fixed because of depreciation on store construction
costs and lease expense. As a result, significant losses would result should the Retail segment experience a decline in sales for any reason. 
Certain
of the Company's stores have been designed and built to serve as high profile venues that function as vehicles for general corporate marketing, corporate events, and brand awareness. Because
of their unique design elements, locations and size, these stores require substantially more investment in equipment and leasehold improvements than the Company's more typical retail stores. The
Company has opened four such stores and has one under construction. Because of their location and size, these high profile stores also require the Company to enter into substantially larger operating
lease commitments compared to those required for its more typical stores. Current leases on such locations have terms ranging from 10 to 15 years with total commitments per location over the
lease terms ranging from $25 million to $50 million. Closure or poor performance of one of these high profile stores could have a particularly significant negative impact on the
Company's results of operations and financial condition. 
Many
of the general risks and uncertainties the Company faces could also have an adverse impact on its Retail segment. Also, many factors unique to retail operations present risks and uncertainties,
some of which are beyond the Company's control, that could adversely affect the Retail segment's future results, cause its actual results to differ from those currently expected, and/or have an
adverse effect on the Company's consolidated results of operations. Potential risks and uncertainties unique to retail operations that could have an adverse impact on the Retail segment include, among
other things, macro-economic factors that have a negative impact on general retail activity; inability to manage costs associated with store construction and operation; lack of consumer acceptance of
the Company's retail approach; failure to attract new users to the Macintosh platform; inability to sell third-party hardware and software products at adequate margins; failure to manage relationships
with existing retail channel partners; lack of experience in managing retail operations outside the United States; costs associated with unanticipated fluctuations in the value of Apple-branded and
third-party retail inventory; and inability to obtain quality retail locations at reasonable cost. 
Unit sales of the Company's professionally oriented desktop systems have declined sharply over the past several years negatively impacting net sales and gross margin.  
Unit sales of Power Macintosh systems fell 13% during 2003 as compared to 2002 and fell 18% in 2002 from 2001. Power Macintosh unit sales have fallen as a percentage of total
Macintosh unit sales from 30% in 2001 to 22% in 2003. The Company believes that weak economic conditions over the past several years are having a pronounced negative impact on its professional and
creative customers who are the primary users of such systems. Also, it is likely that many of the Company's current and potential customers, particularly professional and creative customers who are
most likely to utilize the Company's Power Macintosh systems, believe that the relatively slower MHz rating or clock speed of the microprocessors it utilizes in its Macintosh systems compares
unfavorably to those utilized by other operating systems and translates to slower overall system performance. In addition to the negative impact on net sales, declining sales of Power Macintosh
systems also have a negative effect on the Company's overall gross margin because Power Macintosh systems generally have higher individual gross margins than the Company's other Macintosh systems.
Continued deterioration in Power Macintosh unit sales could adversely affect the Company's future net sales and gross margin. If future unit sales of Power Macintosh systems fail to 
45


 
partially
or fully recover, it will be difficult for the Company to improve its overall profitability. While the Company has introduced faster Power Macintosh systems utilizing 64-bit
PowerPC G5 processors during 2003, there can be no assurance that introduction of such systems will favorably impact net sales either in the short or long term. 
The Company faces increasing competition in the U.S. education market.  
Sales in the United States to both elementary and secondary schools, as well as for college and university customers, remain a core market for Apple. Net sales in these markets
fell to 18% of the Company's total net sales in 2003 from 21% and 26% in 2002 and 2001, respectively. The drop in 2003 reflects declines in both net sales and Macintosh unit sales in these markets of
4% and 6%, respectively, in fiscal 2003 compared to 2002. Additionally, several competitors of the Company have either targeted or announced their intention to target the education market for personal
computers, which could also negatively affect the Company's market share. In an effort to regain market share and remain competitive, the Company has been and will continue to pursue 1:1 learning
solutions in education. These 1:1 solutions and other strategic sales are generally priced more aggressively and could result in significantly less profitability or even in financial losses,
particularly for larger deals. Although the Company believes it has taken certain steps to strengthen its position in the education market, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to
increase or maintain its share of the education market or execute profitably on large strategic arrangements. Failure to do so may have an adverse impact on the Company's operating results and
financial condition. 
The Company's future operating performance is dependent on the performance of distributors and other resellers of the Company's products.  
The Company distributes its products through wholesalers, resellers, national and regional retailers and cataloguers, many of whom distribute products from competing
manufacturers. In addition, the Company also sells many of its products and resells certain third-party products in most of its major markets directly to end users, certain education customers, and
certain resellers through its online
stores around the world. The Company also sells its own products and certain third-party products through its retail stores. Many of the Company's significant resellers operate on narrow product
margins and have been negatively affected by current economic conditions. Considerable trade receivables that are not covered by collateral or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company's
distribution and retail channel partners. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if the financial condition of these resellers weaken, if resellers within consumer
channels were to cease distribution of the Company's products, or if uncertainty regarding demand for the Company's products caused resellers to reduce their ordering and marketing of the Company's
products. The Company has invested and will continue to invest in various programs to enhance reseller sales, including staffing selected resellers' stores with Company employees. These programs could
require a substantial investment from the Company, while providing no assurance of return or incremental revenue to offset this investment. 
Over
the past several years, an increasing proportion of the Company's net sales have been made by the Company directly to end-users through its online stores around the world and through
its retail stores in the United States. Some of the Company's resellers have perceived this expansion of the Company's direct sales as conflicting with their own business and economic interests as
distributors and resellers of the Company's products. Perception of such a conflict could discourage the Company's resellers from investing additional resources in the distribution and sale of the
Company's products or lead them to limit or cease distribution of the Company's products. The Company's business and financial results could be adversely affected if expansion of its direct sales to
end-users causes some or all of its resellers to cease or limit distribution of the Company's products. 
Further
information regarding risks associated with Marketing and Distribution may be found in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K under the heading "Markets and Distribution,"
which information is hereby incorporated by reference. 
46


 

The Company's business is subject to the risks of international operations.  
A large portion of the Company's revenue is derived from its international operations. As a result, the Company's operating results and financial condition could be
significantly affected by risks associated with international activities, including economic and labor conditions, political instability, tax laws (including U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiaries), and
changes in the value of the U.S. dollar versus the local currency in which the products are sold and goods and services are purchased. The Company's primary exposure to movements in foreign currency
exchange rates relate to non-dollar denominated sales in Europe, Japan, Australia, Canada, and certain parts of Asia and non-dollar denominated operating expenses incurred
throughout the world. Weaknesses in foreign currencies, particularly the Japanese Yen and the Euro, can adversely impact consumer demand for the Company's products and the U.S. dollar value of the
Company's foreign currency denominated sales. Conversely, strengthening in these and other foreign currencies can increase the cost to the Company of product components, negatively affecting the
Company's results of operations. 
Margins
on sales of Apple products in foreign countries, and on sales of products that include components obtained from foreign suppliers, can be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate
fluctuations and by international trade regulations, including tariffs and antidumping penalties. 
Derivative
instruments, such as foreign exchange forward and option positions, and interest rate swap and option positions have been utilized by the Company to hedge exposures to fluctuations in
interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. The use of such hedging activities may not offset more than a portion of the adverse financial impact resulting from unfavorable movements in either
foreign exchange or interest rates. 
Further
information related to the Company's global market risks may be found in Part II, Item 7A of this Form 10-K under the subheading "Foreign Currency Risk" and may be
found in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K at Notes 1 and 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which information is hereby incorporated by reference. 
The Company's future performance is dependent upon support from third-party software developers. If third-party software applications cease to be developed or available for the
Company's hardware products, then customers may choose not to buy the Company's products.  
The Company believes that decisions by customers to purchase the Company's personal computers, as opposed to Windows-based systems, are often based on the availability of
third-party software for particular applications such as Microsoft Office. The Company also believes the availability of third-party application software for the Company's hardware products depends in
part on third-party developers' perception and analysis of the relative benefits of developing, maintaining, and upgrading such software for the Company's products versus software for the larger
Windows market. This analysis is based on factors such as the perceived strength of the Company and its products, the anticipated potential revenue that may be generated, acceptance by customers of
Mac OS X, and the costs of developing such software products. To the extent the Company's financial losses in prior years and the minority market share held by the Company in the personal computer
market, as well as the Company's decision to end its Mac OS licensing program, have caused software developers to question the Company's prospects in the personal computer market, developers could be
less inclined to develop new application software or upgrade existing software for the Company's products and more inclined to devote their resources to developing and upgrading software for the
larger Windows market. Moreover, there can be no assurance software developers will continue to develop software for Mac OS X, the Company's operating system, on a timely basis or at all. 
In
addition, past and future development by the Company of its own software applications and solutions may negatively impact the decision of software developers to develop, maintain, and upgrade
similar or competitive software for the Company's products. The Company currently markets and sells a variety of software applications for use by professionals, consumers, and education customers that
could influence 
47


 

the
decision of third-party software developers to develop or upgrade Macintosh-compatible software products. Software applications currently marketed by the Company include software for professional
film and video editing, professional compositing and visual effects for large format film and video productions, professional music production and music post production, professional and consumer DVD
encoding and authoring, consumer digital video and digital photo editing and management, digital music management, desktop-based database management, and high-quality presentations. The
Company also markets an integrated productivity application that incorporates word processing, page layout, image manipulation, spreadsheets, databases, and presentations in a single application. 
In
August 1997, the Company and Microsoft Corporation entered into patent cross license and technology agreements. In addition, for a period of five years through August 2002, and
subject to certain limitations related to the number of Macintosh computers sold by the Company, Microsoft was required to make versions of its Microsoft Office and Internet Explorer products for the
Mac OS. Although Microsoft has released Microsoft Office and Internet Explorer for Mac OS X, Microsoft is not obligated to produce future versions of its products subsequent to August 2002.
While the Company believes its relationship with Microsoft has been and will continue to be beneficial to the Company and to its efforts to increase the installed base for the Mac OS, the Company does
compete directly with Microsoft in a number of key areas. Accordingly, Microsoft's interest in producing application software for the Mac OS following expiration of the agreements may be influenced by
Microsoft's perception of its interests as the vendor of the Windows operating system. Discontinuance of Microsoft Office and other Microsoft products for the Macintosh platform would have an adverse
effect on the Company's net sales and results of operations. In June of 2003, Microsoft stated that it would no longer develop new versions of Internet Explorer for the Mac OS. Microsoft's decision to
discontinue development of Internet Explorer for Mac OS X appears to have been influenced in part by the Company's introduction during 2003 of its own web browser, Safari. It is unclear what impact,
if any, Microsoft's decision to cease further development of Internet Explorer for Mac OS X will have on the Company. However, if customers chose not to purchase the Company's products because
Internet Explorer is not available on the Macintosh platform or should websites fail to provide support for web browsers other than Internet Explorer, the Company's net sales and results of operations
could be materially adversely affected. 
The Company's business relies on access to patents and intellectual property obtained from third parties, and the Company's future results could be adversely affected if it is
alleged or found to have infringed on the intellectual property rights of others.  
Many of the Company's products are designed to include intellectual property obtained from third parties. While it may be necessary in the future to seek or renew licenses
relating to various aspects of its products and business methods, the Company believes that based upon past experience and industry
practice, such licenses generally could be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. However, there can be no assurance that the necessary licenses would be available or available on acceptable
terms. 
Because
of technological changes in the computer industry, current extensive patent coverage, and the rapid rate of issuance of new patents, it is possible certain components of the Company's products
and business methods may unknowingly infringe existing patents of others. The Company has from time to time been notified that it may be infringing certain patents or other intellectual property
rights of others. Responding to such claims, regardless of their merit, can be time consuming, result in significant expenses, and cause the diversion of management and technical personnel. Several
pending claims are in various stages of evaluation. The Company may consider the desirability of entering into licensing agreements in certain of these cases. However, no assurance can be given that
such licenses can be obtained on acceptable terms or that litigation will not occur. In the event there is a temporary or permanent injunction entered prohibiting the Company from marketing or selling
certain of its products or a successful claim of infringement against the Company requiring it to pay royalties to a third-party, the Company's future operating results and financial condition could
be adversely affected. Information regarding claims and litigation involving the Company related to alleged patent infringement and other matters is set forth in 
48


 

Part I,
Item 3 of this Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, the Company does not have a potential liability for damages or royalties from any current legal proceedings or
claims related to the infringement of patent or other intellectual property rights of others that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its results of operations, or
financial condition. However, the results of such legal proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of the matters related to infringement of patent or
other intellectual property rights of others described in Part I, Item 3 of this Form 10-K or should several of these matters be resolved against the Company in the same
reporting period, the operating results of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. 
The Company expects its quarterly revenue and operating results to fluctuate for a variety of reasons.  
The Company's profit margins vary among its products and its distribution channels. As a result, the overall profitability of the Company in any given period will depend, in
part, on the product, geographic, and channel mix reflected in that period's net sales. 
The typical concentration of net sales in the third month of the Company's fiscal quarters can adversely affect the Company's business and operating results.  
The Company generally sells more products during the third month of each quarter than it does during either of the first two months, a pattern typical in the personal computer
industry. This sales pattern can produce pressure on the Company's internal infrastructure during the third month of a quarter and may adversely impact the Company's ability to predict its financial
results accurately. Developments late in a quarter, such as lower-than-anticipated demand for the Company's
products, an internal systems failure, or failure of one of the Company's key logistics, components suppliers, or manufacturing partners, can have significant adverse impacts on the Company and its
results of operations and financial condition. 
The Company's success depends largely on its ability to attract and retain key personnel.  
Much of the future success of the Company depends on the continued service and availability of skilled personnel, including its Chief Executive Officer, members of its
executive team, and those in technical, marketing and staff positions. Experienced personnel in the information technology industry are in high demand and competition for their talents is intense,
especially in the Silicon Valley, where the majority of the Company's employees are located. The Company has relied on its ability to grant stock options as one mechanism for recruiting and retaining
this highly skilled talent. Potential accounting regulations requiring the expensing of stock options may impair the Company's future ability to provide these incentives without incurring significant
compensation costs. There can be no assurance that the Company will continue to successfully attract and retain key personnel. 
The Company is subject to risks associated with the availability and cost of insurance.  
The Company has observed rapidly changing conditions in the insurance markets relating to nearly all areas of traditional corporate insurance. Such conditions have resulted in
higher premium costs, higher policy deductibles, and lower coverage limits. For some risks, because of cost and/or availability, the Company does not have insurance coverage. For these reasons, the
Company is retaining a greater portion of its insurable risks than it has in the past at relatively greater cost. 
Business interruptions could adversely affect the Company's future operating results.  
The Company's major business operations are subject to interruption by earthquake, fire, power shortages, terrorist attacks and other hostile acts, labor disputes, medical
conditions, and other events beyond its control. The majority of the Company's research and development activities, its corporate headquarters, information technology systems, and other critical
business operations, including certain component suppliers and manufacturing vendors, are located near major seismic faults. The Company does not carry earthquake insurance for direct quake-related
losses. The Company's operating results and financial 
49


 
condition
could be materially adversely affected in the event of a major earthquake or other natural or manmade disaster. 
Failure of the Company's information technology systems and breaches in the security of data could adversely affect the Company's future operating results.  
Information technology system failures and breaches of data security could disrupt the Company's ability to function in the normal course of business by potentially causing
delays or cancellation of customer orders, impeding the manufacture or shipment of products, or resulting in the unintentional disclosure of customer or Company information. Management has taken steps
to address these concerns by its implementation of sophisticated network security and internal control measures. However, there can be no assurance that a system failure or data security breach will
not have a material adverse effect on the Company's results of operations. 
The Company is exposed to credit risk on its accounts receivables. This risk is heightened as economic conditions worsen.  
The Company distributes its products through third-party computer resellers and retailers and directly to certain educational institutions and commercial customers. A
substantial majority of the Company's outstanding trade receivables are not covered by collateral or credit insurance. The Company also has non-trade receivables from certain of its
manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale by the Company of raw material components to these manufacturing vendors who manufacture sub-assemblies or assemble final products for the
Company. While the Company has procedures in place to monitor and limit exposure to credit risk on its trade and non-trade receivables, there can be no assurance that such procedures will
be effective in limiting its credit risk and avoiding losses. Additionally, if the global economy and regional economies fail to improve or continue to deteriorate, it becomes more likely that the
Company will incur a material loss or losses as a result of the weakening financial condition of one or more of its customers or manufacturing vendors. 
The Company is subject to risks associated with environmental regulations.  
Production and marketing of products in certain states and countries may subject the Company to environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the
requirement to provide customers the ability to return product at the end of its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or recycling with the Company. Such laws and
regulations have recently been passed in several jurisdictions in which the Company operates, including various European Union member countries, Japan and California. Although the Company does not
anticipate any material adverse effects in the future based on the nature of its operations and the thrust of such laws, there is no assurance that such existing laws or future laws will not have a
material adverse effect on the Company's results of operation and financial position. 
Changes in accounting rules could adversely affect the Company's future operating results.  
Financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. These principles are subject to interpretation by various governing bodies,
including the FASB and the SEC, who interpret and create appropriate accounting regulations. A change from current accounting
regulations can have a significant effect on the Company's results of operations and could impact the manner in which the Company conducts business. 
Unanticipated changes in the Company's tax rates could affect its future results.  
The Company's future effective tax rates could be favorably or unfavorably affected by unanticipated changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax
rates, changes in the valuation of the Company's deferred tax assets and liabilities, or by changes in tax laws or their interpretation. In addition, the Company is subject to the continuous
examination of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. The Company regularly assesses the likelihood of adverse outcomes 
50


 
resulting
from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse
effect on its operating results and financial condition. 
The Company's stock price may be volatile.  
The Company's stock has at times experienced substantial price volatility as a result of variations between its actual and anticipated financial results and as a result of
announcements by the Company and its competitors. In addition, the stock market has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have affected the market price of many technology companies
in ways that have been unrelated to the operating performance of these companies. These factors, including lack of positive performance in the Company's stock price, as well as general economic and
political conditions and investors' concerns regarding the credibility of corporate financial reporting and integrity of financial markets, may materially adversely affect the market price of the
Company's stock in the future. 
The Company's acquisition activity could disrupt its ongoing business and may present risks not contemplated at the time of the transaction.  
The Company has acquired and may continue to acquire companies that have products, services, personnel and technologies that complement the Company's strategic direction and
product roadmap. These acquisitions may involve significant risks and uncertainties, including difficulties in incorporating the acquired companies' operations and technologies; distraction of
management's attention away from normal business operations; insufficient revenue generation to offset liabilities assumed and expenses associated with acquisition; and unidentified issues not
discovered in the Company's due diligence process, including product quality issues and legal contingencies. Acquisitions are inherently risky, and no assurance can be given that the Company's
previous or future acquisitions will be successful and will not materially adversely affect business, operating results or financial condition. The Company has generally paid cash for its
acquisitions. Should the Company issue its common stock or other equity
related purchase rights as consideration in an acquisition, current shareholders' percentage ownership and earnings per share may become diluted. 
51


 
 
 
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk     
Interest Rate and Foreign Currency Risk Management  
To ensure the adequacy and effectiveness of the Company's foreign exchange and interest rate hedge positions, as well as to monitor the risks and opportunities of the
non-hedge portfolios, the Company regularly reviews its foreign exchange forward and option positions, and its interest rate swap and option positions both on a stand-alone basis and in
conjunction with its underlying foreign currency and interest rate related exposures, respectively, from both an accounting and an economic perspective. However, given the effective horizons of the
Company's risk management activities and the anticipatory nature of the exposures intended to hedge, there can be no assurance the aforementioned programs will offset more than a portion of the
adverse financial impact resulting from unfavorable movements in either foreign exchange or interest rates. In addition, the timing of the accounting for recognition of gains and losses related to
mark-to-market instruments for any given period may not coincide with the timing of gains and losses related to the underlying economic exposures and, therefore, may adversely
affect the Company's operating results and financial position. The Company adopted SFAS No. 133 as of October 1, 2000. SFAS No. 133 established accounting and reporting standards
for derivative instruments, hedging activities, and exposure definition. Management does not believe that ongoing application of SFAS No. 133 will significantly alter the Company's hedging
strategies. However, its application may increase the volatility of other income and expense and other comprehensive income. 
Interest Rate Risk  
While the Company is exposed to interest rate fluctuations in many of the world's leading industrialized countries, the Company's interest income and expense is most sensitive
to fluctuations in the general level of U.S. interest rates. In this regard, changes in U.S. interest rates affect the interest earned on the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and
short-term investments as well as costs associated with foreign currency hedges. 
The
Company's fixed income investment policy and strategy is to ensure the preservation of capital, meet liquidity requirements, and optimize return in light of the current credit and interest rate
environment. The Company benchmarks its performance by utilizing external money managers to manage a small portion of the aggregate investment portfolio. The external managers adhere to the Company's
investment policies and also provide occasional research and market information that supplements internal research used to make credit decisions in the investment process. 
During
1994, the Company issued $300 million aggregate principal amount of 6.5% unsecured notes in a public offering registered with the SEC. The notes were sold at 99.925% of par, for an
effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. The notes pay interest semiannually and mature on February 15, 2004. 
The
Company's exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates relates primarily to the Company's investment portfolio and debt obligations and related derivative financial instruments. The
Company places its short-term investments in highly liquid securities issued by high credit quality issuers and, by policy, limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The
Company's general policy is to limit the risk of principal loss and ensure the safety of invested funds by limiting market and credit risk. All highly liquid investments with maturities of three
months or less are classified as cash equivalents; highly liquid investments with maturities greater than three months are classified as short-term investments. As of September 27,
2003, approximately $629 million of the Company's short-term investments had underlying maturities ranging from 1 and 5 years. As of September 28, 2002,
$1.087 billion of the Company's investment portfolio classified as short-term investments had maturities ranging from 1 to 5 years. The remainder all had underlying
maturities between 3 and 12 months. Due to liquidity needs, or in anticipation of credit deterioration, or for the purpose of duration management of the Company's investment portfolio, the
Company may sell investments prior to their stated maturities. As a result of such activity, the Company recognized net gains of $21 million in 2003 and $7 million in 2002. 
52


 

In
order to provide a meaningful assessment of the interest rate risk associated with the Company's investment portfolio, the Company performed a sensitivity analysis to determine the impact that a
change in interest rates would have on the value of the investment portfolio assuming a 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve. Based on investment positions as of September 27,
2003, a hypothetical 100 basis point increase in interest rates across all maturities would result in a $12.9 million decline in the fair market value of the portfolio. As of
September 28, 2002, a similar 100 basis point shift in the yield curve would have resulted in a $37.7 million decline in fair value. Such losses would only be realized if the Company
sold the investments prior to maturity. Except in instances noted above, the Company's policy is to hold investments to maturity. 
The
Company sometimes enters into interest rate derivative transactions, including interest rate swaps, collars, and floors, with financial institutions in order to better match the Company's
floating-rate interest income on its cash equivalents and short-term investments with its fixed-rate interest expense on its debt, and/or to diversify a portion
of the Company's exposure away from fluctuations in short-term U.S. interest rates. The Company may also enter into interest rate contracts that are intended to reduce the cost of the
interest rate risk management program. The Company entered into no interest rate asset swaps during 2003 or 2002 and had no open interest rate asset swaps at September 27, 2003. 
In
prior years, the Company had entered into interest rate debt swaps with financial institutions. The interest rate debt swaps, which qualified as accounting hedges, generally required the Company to
pay a floating interest rate based on the three- or six-month U.S. dollar LIBOR and receive a fixed rate of interest without exchanges of the underlying notional amounts. These swaps
effectively converted the Company's fixed-rate 10-year debt to floating-rate debt and convert a portion of the floating rate investments to fixed rate. Due to
prevailing market interest rates, during 2002 the Company entered into and then subsequently closed out debt swap positions realizing a gain of $6 million. During 2001 the Company closed out
all of its then existing debt swap positions realizing a gain of $17 million. Both the gains in 2002 and 2001 were deferred, recognized in long-term debt and are being amortized to
other income and expense over the remaining life of the debt. 
Foreign Currency Risk  
Overall, the Company is a net receiver of currencies other than the U.S. dollar and, as such, generally benefits from a weaker dollar and is adversely affected by a stronger
dollar relative to major currencies worldwide. Accordingly, changes in exchange rates, and in particular a strengthening of the U.S. dollar, may negatively affect the Company's net sales and gross
margins as expressed in U.S. dollars. There is also a risk that the Company will have to adjust local currency product pricing within the time frame of our hedged positions due to competitive
pressures when there has been significant volatility in foreign currency exchange rates. 
The
Company enters into foreign currency forward and option contracts with financial institutions primarily to protect against foreign exchange risks associated with existing assets and liabilities,
certain firmly committed transactions, and probable but not firmly committed transactions. Generally, the Company's practice is to hedge a majority of its existing material foreign exchange
transaction exposures. However, the Company may not hedge certain foreign exchange transaction exposures due to immateriality, prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular exposures, and limited
availability of appropriate hedging instruments. The Company also enters into foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset the foreign exchange gains and losses generated by the
re-measurement of certain recorded assets and liabilities denominated in non-functional currencies of its foreign subsidiaries. 
In
order to provide a meaningful assessment of the foreign currency risk associated with certain of the Company's foreign currency derivative positions, the Company performed a sensitivity analysis
using a value-at-risk (VAR) model to assess the potential impact of fluctuations in exchange rates. The VAR model consisted of using a Monte Carlo simulation to generate 3000
random market price paths. The VAR is the maximum expected loss in fair value, for a given confidence interval, to the Company's foreign 
53


 

exchange
portfolio due to adverse movements in rates. The VAR model is not intended to represent actual losses but is used as a risk estimation and management tool. The model assumes normal market
conditions. Forecasted transactions, firm commitments, and assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies were excluded from the model. Based on the results of the model, the Company
estimates with 95% confidence a maximum one-day loss in fair value of $7.5 million as of September 27, 2003 compared to a maximum one-day loss of
$3.8 million as of September 28, 2002. Because the Company uses foreign currency instruments for hedging purposes, losses incurred on those instruments are generally offset by increases
in the fair value of the underlying exposures. 
Actual
gains and losses in the future associated with the Company's investment portfolio and derivative positions may differ materially from the sensitivity analyses performed as of
September 27, 2003 due to the inherent limitations associated with predicting the changes in the timing and amount of interest rates, foreign currency exchanges rates, and the Company's actual
exposures and positions. 
54




  

 
 
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data     



Index to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 
Page



Financial Statements:
 

 


 
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002
 
56


 
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003
 
57


 
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders' Equity for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003
 
58


 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003
 
59


 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
60


 
Selected Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited)
 
100


 
Report of Independent Auditors, KPMG LLP
 
102



All
financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not present or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the
information required is included in the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto. 
55




  

 
 
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS         (In millions, except share amounts)     



 
 
September 27, 2003
 
September 28, 2002
 


ASSETS:
 
 
 
 



Current assets:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Cash and cash equivalents
 
$
3,396
 
$
2,252
 


 
Short-term investments
 
 
1,170
 
 
2,085
 


 
Accounts receivable, less allowances of $49 and $51, respectively
 
 
766
 
 
565
 


 
Inventories
 
 
56
 
 
45
 


 
Deferred tax assets
 
 
190
 
 
166
 


 
Other current assets
 
 
309
 
 
275
 


 
 

 

 


 
 
Total current assets
 
 
5,887
 
 
5,388
 


 
Property, plant, and equipment, net
 
 
669
 
 
621
 


 
Goodwill
 
 
85
 
 
85
 


 
Acquired intangible assets
 
 
24
 
 
34
 


 
Other assets
 
 
150
 
 
170
 


 
 

 

 


 
 
Total assets
 
$
6,815
 
$
6,298
 


 
 

 

 


LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY:
 
 

 
 


Current liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Accounts payable
 
$
1,154
 
$
911
 


 
Accrued expenses
 
 
899
 
 
747
 


 
Current debt
 
 
304
 
 
—
 


 
 

 

 


 
 
Total current liabilities
 
 
2,357
 
 
1,658
 


Long-term debt
 
 
—
 
 
316
 


Deferred tax liabilities and other non-current liabilities
 
 
235
 
 
229
 


 
 

 

 


 
 
Total liabilities
 
 
2,592
 
 
2,203
 


 
 

 

 


Commitments and contingencies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Shareholders' equity:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Common stock, no par value; 900,000,000 shares authorized; 366,726,584 and 358,958,989 shares issued and outstanding, respectively
 
 
1,926
 
 
1,826
 


 
Deferred stock compensation
 
 
(62
)
 
(7
)


 
Retained earnings
 
 
2,394
 
 
2,325
 


 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
 
 
(35
)
 
(49
)


 
 

 

 


 
 
Total shareholders' equity
 
 
4,223
 
 
4,095
 


 
 

 

 


 
 
Total liabilities and shareholders' equity
 
$
6,815
 
$
6,298
 


 
 

 

 



See
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 
56



  

 
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS         (In millions, except share and per share amounts)     



Three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Net sales
 
$
6,207
 
$
5,742
 
$
5,363
 


Cost of sales
 
 
4,499
 
 
4,139
 
 
4,128
 


 
 

 

 

 


Gross margin
 
 
1,708
 
 
1,603
 
 
1,235
 


 
 

 

 

 


Operating expenses:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Research and development
 
 
471
 
 
446
 
 
430
 


 
Selling, general, and administrative
 
 
1,212
 
 
1,109
 
 
1,138
 


 
Restructuring costs
 
 
26
 
 
30
 
 
—
 


 
Purchased in-process research and development
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
11
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
 
Total operating expenses
 
 
1,709
 
 
1,586
 
 
1,579
 


 
 

 

 

 


Operating income (loss)
 
 
(1
)
 
17
 
 
(344
)



Other income and expense:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Gains (losses) on non-current investments, net
 
 
10
 
 
(42
)
 
88
 


 
Unrealized loss on convertible securities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(13
)


 
Interest and other income, net
 
 
83
 
 
112
 
 
217
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
 
Total other income and expense
 
 
93
 
 
70
 
 
292
 


 
 

 

 

 


Income (loss) before provision for (benefit from) income taxes
 
 
92
 
 
87
 
 
(52
)


Provision for (benefit from) income taxes
 
 
24
 
 
22
 
 
(15
)


 
 

 

 

 


Income (loss) before accounting changes
 
 
68
 
 
65
 
 
(37
)


 
 

 

 

 


Cumulative effects of accounting changes, net of income taxes
 
 
1
 
 
—
 
 
12
 


 
 

 

 

 


Net income (loss)
 
$
69
 
$
65
 
$
(25
)


 
 

 

 

 


Earnings (loss) per common share before accounting changes:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Basic
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.11
)


 
Diluted
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.11
)



Earnings (loss) per common share:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Basic
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)


 
Diluted
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)



Shares used in computing earnings (loss) per share (in thousands):
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Basic
 
 
360,631
 
 
355,022
 
 
345,613
 


 
Diluted
 
 
363,466
 
 
361,785
 
 
345,613
 



See
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 
57



  

 
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY         (In millions, except share amounts which are in thousands)     



 
 
Preferred Stock
 
Common Stock
 
 
 
 
 
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Income (Loss)
 
 
 


 
 
Retained
Earnings
 
Deferred Stock
Compensation
 
Total
Shareholders'
Equity
 


 
 
Shares
 
Amount
 
Shares
 
Amount
 


Balances as of September 30, 2000
 
76
 
$
76
 
335,677
 
$
1,502
 
$
2,285
 
$
—
 
$
244
 
$
4,107
 


 
Components of comprehensive loss:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Net loss
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(25
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(25
)


 
 
Change in foreign currency translation
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(3
)
 
(3
)


 
 
Change in unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(267
)
 
(267
)


 
 
Change in unrealized gain on derivative investments, net of tax
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
4
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
 
 
Total comprehensive loss
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(291
)


 
Issuance of common stock and assumption of stock options in connection with acquisition
 
—
 
 
—
 
2,403
 
 
66
 
 
—
 
 
(13
)
 
—
 
 
53
 


 
Amortization of deferred stock compensation
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
2
 
 
—
 
 
2
 


 
Common stock issued under stock plans
 
—
 
 
—
 
3,660
 
 
42
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
42
 


 
Conversion of Series A preferred stock
 
(76
)
 
(76
)
9,182
 
 
76
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
Tax benefit related to stock options
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
7
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Balances as of September 29, 2001
 
—
 
$
—
 
350,922
 
$
1,693
 
$
2,260
 
$
(11
)
$
(22
)
$
3,920
 


 
Components of comprehensive income:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Net income
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
65
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
65
 


 
 
Change in foreign currency translation
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
5
 


 
 
Change in unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(17
)
 
(17
)


 
 
Change in unrealized gain on derivative investments, net of tax
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(15
)
 
(15
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
 
 
Total comprehensive income
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38
 


 
Amortization of deferred stock compensation
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
4
 
 
—
 
 
4
 


 
Common stock issued under stock plans
 
—
 
 
—
 
8,037
 
 
105
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
105
 


 
Tax benefit related to stock options
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
28
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
28
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Balances as of September 28, 2002
 
—
 
$
—
 
358,959
 
$
1,826
 
$
2,325
 
$
(7
)
$
(49
)
$
4,095
 


 
Components of comprehensive income:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Net income
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
69
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
69
 


 
 
Change in foreign currency translation
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
31
 
 
31
 


 
 
Change in unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities, net of tax
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(12
)
 
(12
)


 
 
Change in unrealized gain on derivative investments, net of tax
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(5
)
 
(5
)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
 
 
Total comprehensive income
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83
 


 
Amortization of deferred stock compensation
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
15
 
 
—
 
 
15
 


 
Write-off of deferred stock compensation
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
—
 
 
5
 


 
Common stock issued under stock plans
 
—
 
 
—
 
9,299
 
 
128
 
 
—
 
 
(75
)
 
—
 
 
53
 


 
Settlement of forward purchase agreement
 
—
 
 
—
 
(1,531
)
 
(35
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(35
)


 
Tax benefit related to stock options
 
—
 
 
—
 
—
 
 
7
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
7
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Balances as of September 27, 2003
 
—
 
$
—
 
366,727
 
$
1,926
 
$
2,394
 
$
(62
)
$
(35
)
$
4,223
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 
58



  

 
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS         (In millions)     



Three fiscal years ended September 27, 2003 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of the year
 
$
2,252
 
$
2,310
 
$
1,191
 


 
 

 

 

 


Operating Activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Net income (loss)
 
 
69
 
 
65
 
 
(25
)


Cumulative effects of accounting changes, net of taxes
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 
 
(12
)


Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to cash generated by operating activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Depreciation, amortization and accretion
 
 
113
 
 
114
 
 
100
 


 
Stock based compensation expense
 
 
16
 
 
5
 
 
2
 


 
Non-cash restructuring
 
 
12
 
 
8
 
 
—
 


 
Benefit from deferred income taxes
 
 
(11
)
 
(34
)
 
(36
)


 
Loss on disposition of property, plant, and equipment
 
 
2
 
 
7
 
 
9
 


 
Gains on sales of short-term investments, net
 
 
(21
)
 
(7
)
 
—
 


 
(Gains) losses on sales of non-current investments, net
 
 
(10
)
 
42
 
 
(88
)


 
Gain on forward purchase agreement
 
 
(6
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
Unrealized loss on convertible securities
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
13
 


 
Purchased in-process research and development
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
11
 


Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Accounts receivable
 
 
(201
)
 
(99
)
 
487
 


 
Inventories
 
 
(11
)
 
(34
)
 
22
 


 
Other current assets
 
 
(34
)
 
(114
)
 
106
 


 
Other assets
 
 
(30
)
 
(11
)
 
12
 


 
Accounts payable
 
 
243
 
 
110
 
 
(356
)


 
Other liabilities
 
 
159
 
 
36
 
 
(60
)


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
Cash generated by operating activities
 
 
289
 
 
89
 
 
185
 


 
 

 

 

 


Investing Activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Purchases of short-term investments
 
 
(2,648
)
 
(4,144
)
 
(4,268
)


Proceeds from maturities of short-term investments
 
 
2,446
 
 
2,846
 
 
4,811
 


Proceeds from sales of short-term investments
 
 
1,116
 
 
1,254
 
 
278
 


Proceeds from sales of non-current investments
 
 
45
 
 
25
 
 
340
 


Purchases of property, plant, and equipment
 
 
(164
)
 
(174
)
 
(232
)


Cash used for business acquisitions
 
 
—
 
 
(52
)
 
(19
)


Other
 
 
33
 
 
(7
)
 
(18
)


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
Cash generated by (used for) investing activities
 
 
828
 
 
(252
)
 
892
 


 
 

 

 

 


Financing Activities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Proceeds from issuance of common stock
 
 
53
 
 
105
 
 
42
 


Cash used for repurchase of common stock
 
 
(26
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
Cash generated by financing activities
 
 
27
 
 
105
 
 
42
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
 
 
1,144
 
 
(58
)
 
1,119
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of the year
 
$
3,396
 
$
2,252
 
$
2,310
 


 
 

 

 

 


Supplemental cash flow disclosures:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Cash paid during the year for interest
 
$
20
 
$
20
 
$
20
 


 
Cash paid for income taxes, net
 
$
45
 
$
11
 
$
42
 


 
Noncash transactions:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Issuance of common stock for conversion of Series A preferred stock
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
76
 


 
 
Issuance of common stock in connection with acquisition
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
66
 



See
accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 
59



  

 
 
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS     
Note 1—Summary of Significant Accounting Policies  
Apple
Computer, Inc. and its subsidiaries (the Company) designs, manufactures and markets personal computers and related software, peripherals and personal computing and communicating
solutions. The Company's products include the Macintosh line of desktop and notebook computers, the Mac OS X operating system, the iPod digital music player, and a portfolio of software products and
peripherals for education, creative, consumer and business customers. The Company sells its products through its online stores, direct sales force, third-party wholesalers and resellers, and its own
retail stores. 
Basis of Presentation and Preparation  
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated. The preparation of these
consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in these
consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Certain prior year amounts in the consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation. 
Typically,
the Company's fiscal year ends on the last Saturday of September. Fiscal years 2003, 2002 and 2001 were each 52-week years. However, approximately every six years, the Company
reports a 53-week fiscal year to align its fiscal quarters with calendar quarters by adding a week to its first fiscal quarter. All information presented herein is based on the Company's
fiscal calendar. 
Financial Instruments  
Cash Equivalents and Short-term Investments  
The Company places its short-term investments in highly liquid securities issued by high credit quality issuers. All highly liquid investments with maturities of
three months or less at the date of purchase are classified as cash equivalents; highly liquid investments with maturities greater than three months are classified as short-term
investments. Management determines the appropriate classification of its investments in debt and marketable equity securities at the time of purchase and reevaluates such designation as of each
balance sheet date. The Company's debt and marketable equity securities have been classified and accounted for as available-for-sale. These securities are carried at fair
value, with the unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported as a component of shareholders' equity. The cost of securities sold is based upon the specific identification method. 
Non-Current Debt and Equity Investments  
The Company has made investments in non-current debt and equity investments of public and privately held companies that have been reflected in the consolidated
balance sheets as long-term assets within other assets. They are not categorized as current assets either because, given their nature, they are not readily convertible into cash or because
they represent potentially longer-term investments by the Company. Further, the fair value of these investments has been subject to a high degree of volatility. The Company's
non-current debt and equity investments have been categorized as available-for-sale requiring that they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses,
net of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. However, the Company recognizes an impairment charge to earnings in the event a decline in fair value below
the cost basis of one of these investments is determined to be other-than-temporary. The Company includes recognized gains and losses resulting from the sale or from
other-than-temporary declines in fair value associated with these investments in other income and expense. Occasionally, the Company uses short-term equity
derivatives to 
60


 
manage
potential dispositions of non-current debt and equity investments. Any gains or losses associated with such derivatives are recognized currently in other income and expense. 
Financial Instruments with Characteristics of Both Liabilities and Equity  
On May 15, 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 150,  Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteristics of
Both Liabilities and Equity. SFAS No. 150 requires issuers to classify as
liabilities (or assets in some circumstances) certain freestanding financial instruments that embody obligations for the issuer and have characteristics of both liabilities and equity. The Company
adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 150 on June 29, 2003, which resulted in a favorable cumulative-effect type adjustment of approximately $3 million. This adjustment related to a
forward purchase agreement that allowed the Company to acquire 1.5 million shares of its common stock at an average price of $16.64 per share for a total cost of $25.5 million. The
Company settled this forward purchase agreement in August 2003, which resulted in an additional gain of approximately $6 million representing the increase in fair value of the agreement
from June 29, 2003 through the settlement date. 
Derivative Financial Instruments  
On October 1, 2000, the Company adopted SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging
Activities. SFAS No. 133 establishes accounting and reporting standards for derivative instruments, hedging activities, and exposure definition. SFAS No. 133
requires that all derivatives be recognized as either assets or liabilities at fair value. Derivatives that are not hedges must be adjusted to fair value through income. If the derivative is a hedge,
depending on the nature of the hedge, changes in fair value will either be offset against the change in fair value of the hedged assets, liabilities, or firm commitments through earnings, or
recognized in other comprehensive income until the hedged item is recognized in earnings. Net of the related income tax effect of approximately $5 million, adoption of SFAS No. 133
resulted in a favorable cumulative-effect type adjustment to net income of approximately $12 million. Net of the related income tax effect of approximately $5 million, adoption of SFAS
No. 133 resulted in a favorable cumulative-effect-type adjustment to other comprehensive income of approximately $12 million, all of which was reclassified to earnings during
2001. Management does not believe that ongoing application of SFAS No. 133 will significantly alter the Company's hedging strategies. However, its application may increase the volatility of
other income and expense and other comprehensive income. 
For
derivative instruments that hedge the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows that are attributable to a particular risk and that are designated as cash flow hedges, the net gain or
loss on the derivative instrument is reported as a component of other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity and reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods during which the hedged
transaction affects earnings. To receive hedge accounting treatment, cash flow hedges must be highly effective in achieving offsetting changes to expected future cash flows on hedged transactions. For
derivative instruments that hedge the exposure to changes in the fair value of an asset or a liability or an identified portion thereof that are attributable to a particular risk and that are
designated as fair value hedges, the net gain or loss on the derivative instrument as well as the offsetting gain or loss on the hedged item attributable to the hedged risk are recognized in earnings
in the current period. The net gain or loss on the effective portion of a derivative instrument that is designated as an economic hedge of the foreign currency translation exposure of the net
investment in a foreign operation is reported in the same manner as a foreign currency translation adjustment. For forward contracts designated as net investment hedges, the Company excludes changes
in fair value relating to changes in the forward carry component from its definition of effectiveness. Accordingly, any gains or losses related to this component are recognized in current 
61


 

earnings.
For derivative instruments not designated as hedging instruments, changes in fair value are recognized in earnings in the current period. 
For
foreign currency forward contracts designated as cash flow hedges, hedge effectiveness is measured based on changes in the fair value of the contract attributable to changes in the forward
exchange rate. Changes in the expected future cash flows on the forecasted hedged transaction and changes in the fair value of the forward hedge are both measured from the contract rate to the forward
exchange rate associated with the forward contract's maturity date. For currency option contracts, hedge effectiveness is measured based on changes in the total fair value of the option contract.
Hedge effectiveness is assessed by comparing the present value of the cumulative change in expected future cash flows on the hedged transaction to changes in expected cash flow of the option hedge at
maturity. The net gains or losses on derivative instruments qualifying as cash flow hedges are reported as components of other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity and reclassified into
earnings in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects earnings. Any hedge ineffectiveness is recognized in current earnings in other income and expense. For interest rate
swap agreements qualifying as fair value hedges, the Company assumes no ineffectiveness because these swaps meet the criteria for accounting under the short-cut method defined in SFAS
No. 133. 
Inventories  
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or market. If the cost of the inventories exceeds their market value, provisions are
made currently for the difference between the cost and the market value. 
Property, Plant, and Equipment  
Property, plant, and equipment are stated at cost. Depreciation is computed by use of the declining balance and straight-line methods over the estimated useful
lives of the assets, which are 30 years for buildings, from 2 to 5 years for equipment, and the shorter of lease terms or 10 years for leasehold improvements. The Company
capitalizes eligible costs to acquire or develop internal-use software that are incurred subsequent to the preliminary project stage. Capitalized costs related to internal-use
software are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from 3 to 5 years. 
Asset Retirement Obligations  
On September 29, 2002, the Company adopted SFAS No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations, which
addresses financial accounting and reporting for obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement costs. The standard applies to
legal obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. SFAS No. 143
requires that the fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation be recognized in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. The fair value of
the liability is added to the carrying amount of the associated asset and this additional carrying amount is depreciated over the life of the asset. All of the Company's existing asset retirement
obligations are associated with commitments to return property subject to operating leases to original condition upon lease termination. The Company estimated that as of September 29, 2002,
gross expected future cash flows of $9.5 million would be required to fulfill these obligations. 
62


 
As
of the date of adoption, the Company recorded a $6 million long-term asset retirement liability and a corresponding increase in leasehold improvements. This amount represents the
present value of expected future cash flows associated with returning certain of the Company's leased properties to original condition. The difference between the gross expected future cash flow of
$9.5 million and its present value of $6 million at September 29, 2002, is being accreted over the life of the related leases as an operating expense. Net of the related income
tax effect of approximately $1 million, adoption of SFAS No. 143 resulted in an unfavorable cumulative-effect type adjustment to net income during the first quarter of 2003 of
approximately $2 million. This adjustment represents cumulative depreciation and accretion that would have been recognized through the date of adoption of SFAS No. 143 had the statement
been applied to the Company's existing asset retirement obligations at the time they were initially incurred. 
The
following table reconciles changes in the Company's asset retirement liability for fiscal 2003 (in millions): 



Asset retirement liability recorded at September 29, 2002
 
$
5.5


 
Additional asset retirement obligations recognized
 
 
0.5


 
Accretion recognized
 
 
1.2


 
 



Asset retirement liability as of September 27, 2003
 
$
7.2


 
 




Long-Lived Assets Including Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets  
The Company reviews property, plant, and equipment and certain identifiable intangibles, excluding goodwill, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of its carrying amount to future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to
generate. If property, plant, and equipment and certain identifiable intangibles are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the amount by which the carrying value of the
assets exceeds its fair market value. For the three years ended September 27, 2003, the Company has made no material adjustments to its long-lived assets, except those made in
connection with the restructuring actions described in Note 5. 
The
Company adopted SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in the first quarter of fiscal 2002. SFAS No. 142 requires that
goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives no longer be amortized, but instead be tested for impairment at least annually or sooner whenever events or changes in circumstances
indicate that they may be impaired. Prior to fiscal 2002, goodwill was amortized using the straight-line method over its estimated useful life. The Company completed its transitional
goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2001, and its annual goodwill impairment tests at August 30, 2003 and August 30, 2002, respectively, and found no impairment. The Company
established reporting units based on its current reporting structure. For purposes of testing goodwill for impairment, goodwill has been allocated to these reporting units to the extent it relates to
each reporting unit. 
SFAS
No. 142 also requires that intangible assets with definite lives be amortized over their estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment in accordance with SFAS No. 144,  Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived
Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to Be Disposed Of. The Company is currently
amortizing its acquired intangible assets with definite lives over periods ranging from 3 to 10 years. 
Foreign Currency Translation  
The Company translates the assets and liabilities of its international non-U.S. functional currency subsidiaries into U.S. dollars using exchange rates in effect at
the end of each period. Revenue and 
63


 
expenses
for these subsidiaries are translated using rates that approximate those in effect during the period. Gains and losses from these translations are credited or charged to foreign currency
translation included in "accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)" in shareholders' equity. The Company's foreign manufacturing subsidiaries and certain other international subsidiaries that use
the U.S. dollar as their functional currency remeasure monetary assets and liabilities at exchange rates in effect at the end of each period, and inventories, property, and nonmonetary assets and
liabilities at historical rates. Gains and losses from these translations were insignificant and have been included in the Company's results of operations. 
Revenue Recognition  
Net sales consist primarily of revenue from the sale of products (hardware, software, and peripherals), and extended warranty and support contracts. The Company recognizes
revenue pursuant to applicable accounting standards, including Statement of Position (SOP) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as
amended, and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) No. 101, Revenue Recognition in Financial Statements. 
The
Company recognizes revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable, and collection is probable. Product is considered
delivered to the customer once it has been shipped and title and risk of loss have been transferred. For most of the Company's product sales, these criteria are met at the time the product is shipped.
For online sales to individuals, for some sales to education customers in the United States, and for certain other sales, the Company defers revenue until the customer receives the product because the
Company legally retains a portion of the risk of loss on these sales during transit. If at the outset of an arrangement the Company determines the arrangement fee is not, or is presumed to not be,
fixed and determinable, revenue is deferred and subsequently recognized as amounts become due and payable. 
Revenue
from extended warranty and support contracts is deferred and recognized ratably over the warranty and support periods. These contracts typically include extended phone support, certain
repairs, web-based support resources, diagnostic tools, and extend the Company's one-year basic limited parts and labor warranty. 
The
Company sells software and peripheral products obtained from other companies. The Company establishes its own pricing and retains related inventory risk, is the primary obligor in sales
transactions with its customers, and assumes the credit risk for amounts billed to its customers. Accordingly, the Company recognizes revenue for the sale of products obtained from other companies at
the gross amount billed. 
Revenue
on arrangements that include multiple elements such as hardware, software, and services is allocated to each element based on vendor specific objective evidence (VSOE) of the fair value of
each element. Allocated revenue for each element is recognized when revenue recognition criteria have been met for each element. VSOE is determined based on the price charged when each element is sold
separately. 
The
Company records reductions to revenue for estimated commitments related to price protection and for customer incentive programs, including reseller and end user rebates, and other sales programs
and volume-based incentives. The estimated cost of these programs is accrued as a reduction to revenue in the period the Company has sold the product and committed to a plan. The Company also records
reductions to revenue for expected future product returns based on the Company's historical experience. 
64


 

Generally,
the Company does not offer specified or unspecified upgrade rights to its customers in connection with software sales or the sale of extended warranty and support contracts. However, a
limited number of the Company's software products are available with maintenance agreements that grant customers rights to unspecified future upgrades over the maintenance term on a when and if
available basis. Revenue associated with such maintenance is recognized ratably over the maintenance term. 
Shipping Costs  
The Company's shipping and handling costs are included in cost of sales for all periods presented. 
Warranty Expense  
The Company provides currently for the estimated cost for product warranties at the time the related revenue is recognized. 
Research and Development  
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Development costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed are subject to capitalization beginning
when a product's technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available for general release to customers pursuant to SFAS No. 86, Computer
Software to be Sold, Leased, or Otherwise Marketed. In most instances, the Company's products are released soon after technological feasibility has been established. Therefore,
costs incurred subsequent to achievement of technological feasibility are usually not significant, and generally all software development costs have been expensed. 
During
the third and fourth quarters of 2003, the Company incurred substantial development costs associated with the development of Mac OS X version 10.3 (code-named "Panther"), which
enhances the features and functionality of the previous version of Mac OS X, subsequent to achievement of technological feasibility as evidenced by public demonstration and release of a developer beta
in June 2003, and prior to release of the final version of the product in the first quarter of 2004. Therefore, during 2003 the Company capitalized approximately $14.7 million of
development costs associated with the development of Panther. Amortization of this asset began in the first quarter of 2004 when Panther was shipped and is being recognized on a
straight-line basis in accordance with SFAS No. 86 over a 3 year estimated useful life. 
During
the third and fourth quarters of 2002, the Company incurred substantial development costs associated with the development of Mac OS X version 10.2 (code-named "Jaguar") subsequent
to achievement of technological feasibility as evidenced by public demonstration and release of a developer beta in May 2002, and prior to release of the final version of the product in the
fourth quarter of 2002. As such, the Company capitalized approximately $13.3 million of development costs associated with development of Jaguar. Amortization of this asset began in the fourth
quarter of 2002 when Jaguar was shipped and is being recognized on a straight-line basis in accordance with SFAS No. 86 over a 3 year estimated useful life. In addition,
during 2002, the Company also began capitalizing certain costs related to development of its new PowerSchool enterprise student information system. Capitalization of approximately $6 million
began upon achievement of technological feasibility in the first quarter of 2002. The final version of the enterprise student information system was released in July 2002. 
During
2001 the Company incurred substantial development costs associated with the development of the original version of Mac OS X, subsequent to release of a public beta version of the product and
prior to release of the final product version. As a result, the Company capitalized approximately $5.4 million of development costs during 2001 associated with development of Mac OS X. Related
amortization is 
65


 

computed
by use of the straight-line method in accordance with SFAS No. 86 over a 8 year estimated useful life. 
Total
amortization related to capitalized software development costs was $5.8 million, $1.2 million and $350,000 in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively. 
Advertising Costs  
Advertising costs are expensed as incurred. Advertising expense was $193 million, $209 million, and $261 million for 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. 
Restructuring Charges  
In June 2002, the FASB issued SFAS No. 146, Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities. SFAS
No. 146 supersedes Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) Issue No. 94-3, Liability Recognition for Certain Employee Termination Benefits and Other Costs
To Exit an Activity (Including Certain Costs Associated with a Restructuring) and requires that a liability for a cost associated with an exit or disposal activity be
recognized when the liability is incurred, as opposed to when management commits to an exit plan. SFAS No. 146 also establishes that the liability should initially be measured and recorded at
fair value. This Statement was effective for exit or disposal activities initiated after December 31, 2002. The provisions of SFAS No. 146 were required to be applied prospectively after
the adoption date to newly initiated exit activities. 
Stock-Based Compensation  
The Company measures compensation expense for its employee stock-based compensation plans using the intrinsic value method prescribed by Accounting Principles Board (APB)
Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees. The Company applies the disclosure provisions of SFAS No. 123,  Accounting for Stock-based
Compensation, as amended by SFAS No. 148, Accounting for Stock-based
Compensation—Transition and Disclosure as if the fair value-based method had been applied in measuring compensation expense. The Company has elected to follow APB
Opinion No. 25 because, as discussed below, the alternative fair value accounting provided for under SFAS No. 123 requires use of option valuation models that were not developed for use
in valuing employee stock options and employee stock purchase plan shares. Under APB Opinion No. 25, when the exercise price of the Company's employee stock options equals the market price of
the underlying stock on the date of the grant, no compensation expense is recognized. 
As
required under SFAS No. 123, the pro forma effects of stock-based compensation on net income and earnings per common share for employee stock options granted and employee stock purchase plan
purchases have been estimated at the date of grant and beginning of the period, respectively, using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. For purposes of pro forma disclosures, the estimated fair
value of the options and shares is amortized to pro forma net income over the options' vesting period and the shares' plan period. 
The
Black-Scholes option valuation model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of freely traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. In addition, option
valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions including the expected life of options and the Company's expected stock price volatility. Because the Company's employee stock
options and employee stock purchase plan shares have characteristics significantly different from those of freely traded options, and because changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially
affect the fair value estimate, in 
66


 
management's
opinion, the existing models do not provide a reliable measure of the fair value of the Company's employee stock options and employee stock purchase plan shares. 
For
purposes of pro forma disclosures, the estimated fair value of the options and shares is amortized to pro forma net income (loss) over the options' vesting period and the shares' plan period. The
Company's pro forma information for each of the last three fiscal years follows (in millions, except per share amounts): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Net income (loss)—as reported
 
$
69
 
$
65
 
$
(25
)



Add: Stock-based employee compensation expense included in reported net income (loss), net of tax
 
 

15
 
 

5
 
 

2
 


Deduct: Stock-based employee compensation expense determined under the fair value based method for all awards, net of tax
 
 
(181
)
 
(234
)
 
(373
)


 
 

 

 

 



Net loss—pro forma
 
$

(97
)
$

(164
)
$

(396
)


 
 

 

 

 



Net income (loss) per common share—as reported
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Basic
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)


 
Diluted
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)



Net loss per common share—pro forma
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Basic
 
$
(0.27
)
$
(0.46
)
$
(1.15
)


 
Diluted
 
$
(0.27
)
$
(0.46
)
$
(1.15
)



Earnings Per Common Share  
Basic earnings per common share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the
period. Diluted earnings per common share is computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period
increased to include the number of additional shares of common stock that would have been outstanding if the dilutive potential shares of common stock had been issued. The dilutive effect of
outstanding options and restricted stock is reflected in diluted earnings per share by application of the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential shares of common stock related to stock options were
excluded from the calculation of diluted loss per common share for fiscal 2001 because their effect would have been antidilutive. 
67


 
The
following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share: 



For the Years Ended 
 
September 27,
2003
 
September 28,
2002
 
September 29,
2001
 


Numerator (in millions):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Income (loss) before accounting changes
 
$
68
 
$
65
 
$
(37
)


 
Cumulative effects of accounting changes, net of income taxes
 
$
1
 
$
—
 
$
12
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
Net income (loss)
 
$
69
 
$
65
 
$
(25
)


 
 

 

 

 



Denominator (in thousands):
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Weighted-average shares outstanding
 
 
360,631
 
 
355,022
 
 
345,613
 


 
Effect of dilutive options and dilutive restricted stock
 
 
2,835
 
 
6,763
 
 
—
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
Denominator for diluted earnings (loss) per share
 
 
363,466
 
 
361,785
 
 
345,613
 


 
 

 

 

 



Basic earnings (loss) per share before accounting changes
 
$

0.19
 
$

0.18
 
$

(0.11
)


Cumulative effects of accounting changes, net of tax
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
$
0.04
 


 
 

 

 

 


Basic earnings (loss) per share after accounting changes
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)


 
 

 

 

 



Diluted earnings (loss) per share before accounting changes
 
$

0.19
 
$

0.18
 
$

(0.11
)


Cumulative effects of accounting changes, net of tax
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
$
0.04
 


 
 

 

 

 


Diluted earnings (loss) per share after accounting changes
 
$
0.19
 
$
0.18
 
$
(0.07
)


 
 

 

 

 



Options
to purchase 50.8 million and 58.0 million shares of common stock were outstanding at the end of 2003 and 2002, respectively, that were not included in the computation of diluted
earnings per share for that year because the options' exercise price was greater than the average market price of the Company's common shares for that year and, therefore, the effect would be
antidilutive. At September 29, 2001, the Company had options to purchase 97.2 million shares of its common stock outstanding, all of which were excluded from the computation of diluted
loss per share for 2001 because the effect would have been antidilutive. 
Comprehensive Income  
Comprehensive income consists of two components, net income and other comprehensive income. Other comprehensive income refers to revenue, expenses, gains and losses that under
generally accepted accounting principles are recorded as an element of shareholders' equity but are excluded from net income. The Company's other comprehensive income is comprised of foreign currency
translation adjustments from those subsidiaries not using the U.S. dollar as their functional currency, unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities categorized as
available-for-sale, and net deferred gains and losses on certain derivative instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges. 
Segment Information  
The Company reports segment information based on the "management" approach. The management approach designates the internal reporting used by management for making decisions
and assessing performance as the source of the Company's reportable segments. Information about the Company's products, major customers, and geographic areas on a company-wide basis is
also disclosed. 
68



  
Note 2—Financial Instruments  
The
carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities approximate their fair value due to the short maturities of those instruments. 
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Short-Term Investments  
The following table summarizes the fair value of the Company's cash and available-for-sale securities held in its short-term investment
portfolio, recorded as cash and cash equivalents or short-term investments as of September 27, 2003, and September 28, 2002 (in millions): 



 
 
September 27, 2003
 
September 28, 2002


Cash
 
$
158
 
$
161


 
 

 




U.S. Treasury and Agency securities
 
 

87
 
 

47


U.S. corporate securities
 
 
2,368
 
 
1,828


Foreign securities
 
 
783
 
 
216


 
 

 



 
Total cash equivalents
 
 
3,238
 
 
2,091


 
 

 




U.S. Treasury and Agency securities
 
 

454
 
 

674


U.S. corporate securities
 
 
623
 
 
1,330


Foreign securities
 
 
93
 
 
81


 
 

 



 
Total short-term investments
 
 
1,170
 
 
2,085


 
 

 



 
Total cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments
 
$
4,566
 
$
4,337


 
 

 




The
Company's short-term investment portfolio consists of investments in U.S. Treasury and Agency securities, U.S. corporate securities, and foreign securities. The Company's U.S.
corporate securities consist primarily of commercial paper, certificates of deposit, time deposits and corporate debt securities. Foreign securities consist primarily of foreign commercial paper,
certificates of deposit and time deposits with foreign institutions, most of which are denominated in U.S. dollars. The Company had net unrealized losses totaling $1 million on its investment
portfolio, primarily related to investments with stated maturities greater than 1 year as of September 27, 2003 and net unrealized gains of $20 million on its investment
portfolio, primarily related to investments with stated maturities greater than 1 year, as of September 28, 2002. The Company occasionally sells short-term investments prior
to their stated maturities. As a result of such sales, the Company recognized net gains of $21 million in 2003 and $7 million in 2002. These net gains were included in interest and other
income, net. 
As
of September 27, 2003, approximately $629 million of the Company's short-term investments had underlying maturities ranging from 1 to 5 years. The remaining
short-term investments as of September 27, 2003 had maturities of 3 to 12 months. As of September 28, 2002, approximately $1.087 billion of the Company's
short-term investments had underlying maturities ranging from 1 to 5 years. The remaining short-term investments as of September 28, 2002 had maturities of 3 to
12 months. 
Accounts Receivable  
Trade Receivables  
The Company distributes its products through third-party resellers and directly to certain education, consumer, and commercial customers. The Company generally does not require
collateral from its customers. However, when possible the Company does attempt to limit credit risk on trade receivables with credit insurance for certain customers in Latin America, Europe and Asia
and by arranging with third- 
69


 
party
financing companies to provide flooring arrangements and other loan and lease programs to the Company's direct customers. These credit financing arrangements are directly between the third-party
financing company and the end customer. As such, the Company does not assume any recourse or credit risk sharing related to any of these arrangements. However, considerable trade receivables that are
not covered by collateral, third-party flooring arrangements, or credit insurance are outstanding with the Company's distribution and retail channel partners. Trade receivables from a single customer,
Ingram Micro, Inc., accounted for approximately 10.3% and 10.8% of net accounts receivable as of September 27, 2003, and September 28, 2002, respectively. 
The
following table summarizes the activity in the allowance for doubtful accounts (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Beginning allowance balance
 
$
51
 
$
51
 
$
64
 


Charged to costs and expenses
 
 
4
 
 
10
 
 
7
 


Deductions (a)
 
 
(6
)
 
(10
)
 
(20
)


 
 

 

 

 


Ending allowance balance
 
$
49
 
$
51
 
$
51
 


 
 

 

 

 






(a)Represents
amounts written off against the allowance, net of recoveries. 

Non-Trade Receivables  
The Company has non-trade receivables from certain of its manufacturing vendors resulting from the sale of raw material components to these manufacturing vendors
who manufacture sub-assemblies or assemble final products for the Company. The Company purchases these raw material components directly from suppliers. These non-trade
receivables, which are included in the consolidated balance sheets in other current assets, totaled $184 million and $142 million as of September 27, 2003, and
September 28, 2002, respectively. The Company does not recognize any profits on these sales or reflect the sale of these components in its net sales. 
Inventory Prepayment  
In April 2002, the Company made a $100 million prepayment to an Asian supplier for the purchase of components over the following nine months. In return for this
deposit, the supplier agreed to supply the Company with a specified level of components during the three consecutive fiscal quarters ended December 28, 2002. Approximately $53 million of
this deposit remained unused as of September 28, 2002 and was reflected in the consolidated balance sheets in other current assets. During the first six months of 2003, the remainder of the
deposit balance was fully utilized for the purchase of components. The deposit was unsecured and had no stated interest component. The Company imputed an amount to cost of sales and interest income
during each period the deposit was outstanding at a 3.25% interest rate to reflect the economics of this transaction. 
Derivative Financial Instruments  
The Company uses derivatives to partially offset its business exposure to foreign exchange and interest rate risk. Foreign currency forward and option contracts are used to
offset the foreign exchange risk on certain existing assets and liabilities and to hedge the foreign exchange risk on expected future cash flows on certain forecasted revenues and cost of sales. From
time to time, the Company enters into interest rate swap agreements to modify the interest rate profile of certain investments and debt. The Company's 
70


 
accounting
policies for these instruments are based on whether the instruments are designated as hedge or non-hedge instruments. The Company records all derivatives on the balance sheet at
fair value. 
The
following table shows the notional principal, net fair value, and credit risk amounts of the Company's foreign currency instruments as of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002
(in millions): 



 
 
September 27, 2003
 
September 28, 2002


 
 
Notional
Principal
 
Fair
Value
 
Credit Risk
Amounts
 
Notional
Principal
 
Fair
Value
 
Credit Risk
Amounts


Foreign exchange instruments qualifying as accounting hedges:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Spot/Forward contracts
 
$
464
 
$
(21
)
$
—
 
$
462
 
$
1
 
$
1


 
Purchased options
 
$
512
 
$
3
 
$
3
 
$
196
 
$
—
 
$
—


 
Sold options
 
$
645
 
$
(8
)
$
—
 
$
392
 
$
(4
)
$
—



Foreign exchange instruments other than accounting hedges:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 


 
Spot/Forward contracts
 
$
445
 
$
3
 
$
3
 
$
302
 
$
—
 
$
—


 
Purchased options
 
$
8
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—


 
Sold options
 
$
5
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—



The
notional principal amounts for derivative instruments provide one measure of the transaction volume outstanding as of year-end, and do not represent the amount of the Company's
exposure to credit or market loss. The credit risk amount shown in the table above represents the Company's gross exposure to potential accounting loss on these transactions if all counterparties
failed to perform according to the terms of the contract, based on then-current currency exchange rates at each respective date. The Company's exposure to credit loss and market risk will
vary over time as a function of currency exchange rates. 
The
estimates of fair value are based on applicable and commonly used pricing models using prevailing financial market information as of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002. In
certain instances where judgment is required in estimating fair value, price quotes were obtained from several of the Company's counterparty financial institutions. Although the table above reflects
the notional principal, fair value, and credit risk amounts of the Company's foreign exchange instruments, it does not reflect the gains or losses associated with the exposures and transactions that
the foreign exchange instruments
are intended to hedge. The amounts ultimately realized upon settlement of these financial instruments, together with the gains and losses on the underlying exposures, will depend on actual market
conditions during the remaining life of the instruments. 
Foreign Exchange Risk Management  
The Company enters into foreign currency forward and option contracts with financial institutions primarily to protect against foreign exchange risk associated with existing
assets and liabilities, certain firmly committed transactions and certain probable but not firmly committed transactions. Generally, the Company's practice is to hedge a majority of its existing
material foreign exchange transaction exposures. However, the Company may not hedge certain foreign exchange transaction exposures due to immateriality, prohibitive economic cost of hedging particular
exposures, or limited availability of appropriate hedging instruments. 
71


 
In
accordance with SFAS No. 133, hedges related to probable but not firmly committed transactions of an anticipatory nature are designated and documented at hedge inception as cash flow hedges
and evaluated for hedge effectiveness quarterly. For currency forward contracts, hedge effectiveness is measured based on changes in the total fair value of the contract attributable to changes in the
forward exchange rate. Changes in the expected future cash flows on the forecasted hedged transaction and changes in the fair value of the forward hedge are both measured from the contract rate to the
forward exchange rate associated with the forward contract's maturity date. 
For
currency option contracts, hedge effectiveness is measured based on changes in the total fair value of the option contract. Hedge effectiveness is assessed by comparing the present value of the
cumulative change in expected future cash flows on the hedged transaction to changes in expected cash flow of the option hedge at maturity. The net gains or losses on derivative instruments qualifying
as cash flow hedges are reported as components of other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity and reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction
affects earnings. Any hedge ineffectiveness is recognized in current earnings in other income and expense. 
To
protect gross margins from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, the Company's U.S. dollar functional subsidiaries hedge a portion of forecasted foreign currency revenues, and the
Company's non-U.S. dollar functional subsidiaries selling in local currencies hedge a portion of forecasted inventory purchases not denominated in the subsidiaries' functional currency.
Other comprehensive income associated with hedges of foreign currency revenues is recognized as a component of net sales in the same period as the related sales are recognized, and other comprehensive
income related to inventory purchases is recognized as a component of cost of sales in the same period as the related costs are recognized. Typically, the Company hedges portions of its forecasted
foreign currency exposure associated with revenues and inventory purchases over a time horizon of 3 to 9 months. 
The
Company also enters into foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset the foreign exchange gains and losses generated by the re-measurement of certain recorded assets and
liabilities in non-functional currencies. Changes in the fair value of these derivatives are recognized in current earnings in other income and expense as offsets to the changes in the
fair value of the related assets or liabilities. 
The
Company may enter into foreign currency forward contracts to offset the translation and economic exposure of a net investment position in a foreign subsidiary. Hedge effectiveness on forwards
designated as net investment hedges is measured based on changes in the fair value of the contract attributable to changes in the spot exchange rate. The effective portion of the net gain or loss on a
derivative instrument designated as a hedge of the net investment position in a foreign subsidiary is reported in the same manner as a foreign currency translation adjustment. Any residual changes in
fair value of the forward contract, including changes in fair value based on the differential between the spot and forward exchange rates, are recognized in current earnings in other income and
expense. 
As
discussed above, the Company enters into foreign currency option contracts as items that provide an offset to the re-measurement of certain recorded assets and liabilities denominated
in non-functional currencies. All changes in the fair value of these derivative contracts based on changes in option time value are recorded in current earnings in other income and
expense. Due to market movements, changes in option time value can lead to increased volatility in other income and expense. 
Derivative
instruments designated as cash flow hedges must be de-designated as hedges when it is probable that the forecasted hedged transaction will not occur in the initially identified
time period or within a subsequent 2 month time period. Deferred gains and losses in other comprehensive income associated with 
72


 

such
derivative instruments are immediately reclassified into earnings in other income and expense. Any subsequent changes in fair value of such derivative instruments are also reflected in current
earnings unless they are re-designated as hedges of other transactions. During 2002, the Company recorded net gains of $2.5 million in other income and expense related to the loss
of hedge designation on discontinued cash flow hedges due to changes in the Company's forecast of future net sales and cost of sales and due to prevailing market conditions. During 2001, the Company
recorded a net gain of $5.1 million in other income and expense related to the loss of hedge designation on discontinued cash flow hedges due to changes in the Company's forecast of future net
sales and cost of sales. No net gains, or losses, of a similar nature were recorded in 2003. 
Interest Rate Risk Management  
The Company sometimes enters into interest rate derivative transactions, including interest rate swaps, collars, and floors, with financial institutions in order to better
match the Company's floating-rate interest income on its cash equivalents and short-term investments with its fixed-rate interest expense on its
long-term debt, and/or to diversify a portion of the Company's exposure away from fluctuations in short-term U.S. interest rates. 
As
of September 30, 2000, the Company had entered into interest rate swaps with financial institutions in order to better match the Company's floating-rate interest income on its
cash equivalents and short-term investments with its fixed-rate interest expense on its long-term debt, and to diversify a portion of the Company's exposure away
from fluctuations in short-term U.S. interest rates. The interest rate swaps generally required the Company to pay a floating interest rate based on the three- or six-month
U.S. dollar LIBOR and receive a fixed rate of interest without exchanges of the underlying notional amounts. These swaps effectively converted the Company's fixed-rate 10-year
debt to floating-rate debt and converted a portion of the floating rate investments to fixed rate. The Company assumed no ineffectiveness with regard to the debt interest swaps as each
debt interest rate swap met the criteria for accounting under the short-cut method defined in SFAS No. 133 for fair value hedges of debt instruments. Accordingly, no net gains or
losses were recorded in income relative to the Company's underlying debt interest rate swaps. During fiscal 2001, the Company closed out all of its existing debt interest rate swap positions due to
prevailing market interest rates realizing a gain of $17 million. This gain was deferred, recognized in long-term debt and is being amortized to other income and expense over the
remaining life of the debt. 
The
unrealized loss on the asset swaps as of September 30, 2000, of $5.7 million was deferred and then recognized in income in 2001 as part of the SFAS No. 133 transition
adjustment effective on October 1, 2000. The Company closed out all of its existing interest rate asset swaps during 2001 realizing a gain of $1.1 million. 
As
of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002, the Company had no interest rate derivatives outstanding. Due to perceived market risk, the Company entered into interest rate swaps in
early 2002. The interest rate swaps required the Company to pay a floating interest rate based on six-month U.S. dollar LIBOR and receive a fixed rate of interest without exchanges of the
underlying notional amounts. These swaps effectively converted the Company's fixed-rate 10-year debt to floating-rate debt. The Company assumed no ineffectiveness
with regard to the debt interest swaps as each debt interest rate swap met the criteria for accounting under the short-cut method defined in SFAS No. 133 for fair value hedges of
debt instruments. Accordingly, no net gains or losses were recorded in income relative to the Company's underlying debt interest rate swaps during fiscal 2002 until the Company closed out the
positions in late 2002 due to prevailing market interest rates. Closing the debt interest rate swaps resulted in a realized gain 
73


 

of
$6 million. This gain was deferred, recognized in long-term debt and is being amortized to other income and expense over the remaining life of the debt. 
Debt  
The Company currently has debt outstanding in the form of $300 million of aggregate principal amount 6.5% unsecured notes that were originally issued in 1994. The notes,
which pay interest semiannually, were sold at 99.925% of par, for an effective yield to maturity of 6.51%. The notes, along with approximately $4 million of related unamortized deferred gains
on closed interest rate swaps, are due in February of 2004 and therefore have been classified as current debt as of September 27, 2003. As of September 27, 2003 and September 28,
2002, the carrying amount of these notes, including unamortized deferred gains associated with closed debt interest rate swaps, was $304 million and $316 million, respectively, while the
fair value was $302 million and $299 million, respectively. The fair value of the notes is based on their listed market values as of September 27, 2003 and September 28,
2002. 
Non-Current Debt and Equity Investments and Related Gains and Losses  
The Company has held investments in EarthLink, Inc. (EarthLink), Akamai Technologies, Inc. (Akamai), ARM Holdings plc (ARM), and Samsung Electronics
Co., Ltd (Samsung). These investments have been reflected in the consolidated balance sheets as long term assets within other assets and have been categorized as
available-for-sale requiring that they be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other
comprehensive income. All realized gains on the sale of these investments have been included in total other income and expense. The combined fair value of these investments held by the Company was
$5 million and $39 million as of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002, respectively. 
EarthLink  
In January 2000, the Company invested $200 million in EarthLink, an Internet service provider (ISP). The investment was in EarthLink's Series C Convertible
Preferred Stock, which was convertible by the Company after January 4, 2001, into approximately 7.1 million shares of EarthLink common stock. Concurrent with this investment, EarthLink
and the Company entered into a multi-year agreement to deliver ISP service to Macintosh users in the United States. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company profits from each new Mac
customer that subscribes to EarthLink's ISP service for a specified period of time, and EarthLink is the default ISP in the Company's Internet Setup Software included with all Macintosh computers sold
in the United States. 
During
the first quarter of 2003, the Company sold 2,580,000 shares of EarthLink stock for net proceeds of approximately $13.7 million, an amount that approximated the Company's carrying value
of the shares. During the third quarter of 2003, the Company sold all of its remaining holdings in EarthLink, consisting of 3,960,000 shares of stock for net proceeds of approximately
$23 million, and a gain before taxes of $2 million. 
During
the first quarter of 2002, the Company sold 117,000 shares of EarthLink stock for net proceeds of $2 million and a gain before taxes of $223,000. No sales of EarthLink were made in any
of the subsequent quarters of fiscal 2002. However, during the fourth quarter of 2002, the Company determined that the then current decline in the fair value of its investment in EarthLink was
other-than-temporary. As a result, the Company recognized a $44 million charge to earnings to write-down the basis of its investment in EarthLink to
$35 million. This charge was included in gains (losses) on non-current investments, net. As of September 28, 2002, the Company held 6.5 million shares of EarthLink
stock valued at $35 million. 
74


 

During
the second quarter of 2001, the Company determined that the decline in the fair value of its investment in EarthLink was other-than-temporary requiring that its cost
basis be written down to fair value as a new cost basis and the amount of the write-down be included in earnings. As a result, the Company recognized a $114 million charge to
earnings to write-down the basis of its investment in EarthLink to $86 million. This charge was included in gains (losses) on non-current investments, net. During the
fourth quarter of 2001, the Company sold a total of approximately 425,000 shares of EarthLink stock for net proceeds of approximately $6 million, recorded a gain before taxes of approximately
$800,000, and recognized related income tax of approximately $200,000. 
Akamai  
In June 1999, the Company invested $12.5 million in Akamai, a global Internet content delivery service. The investment was in the form of convertible preferred
stock that converted into 4.1 million shares of Akamai common stock (adjusted for subsequent stock splits) at the time of Akamai's initial public
offering in October 1999. Beginning in the first quarter of 2000, the Company categorized its shares in Akamai as available-for-sale. 
During
the fourth quarter of 2003, the Company sold 1,875,000 shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of $9 million and a gain before taxes of $8 million. As of September 27,
2003, the Company's remaining investment in Akamai consists of 986,000 shares of Akamai stock valued at $5 million. 
During
the first quarter of 2002, the Company sold 250,000 shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of $2 million and a gain before taxes of $710,000. No sales of Akamai were made in any of the
subsequent quarters of fiscal 2002. However, during the fourth quarter of 2002, the Company determined that the decline in the fair value of its investment in Akamai was
other-than-temporary. As a result, the Company recognized a $6 million charge to earnings to write-down the basis of its investment in Akamai to
$3 million. This charge was included in gains (losses) on non-current investments, net. As of September 28, 2002, the Company held 2.9 million shares of Akamai stock
valued at $3 million. 
During
2001, the Company sold a total of approximately 1 million shares of Akamai stock for net proceeds of approximately $39 million and recorded a gain before taxes of approximately
$36 million. 
ARM  
ARM is a publicly held company in the United Kingdom involved in the design and licensing of high performance microprocessors and related technology. 
During
the third quarter of 2003, the Company sold all of its remaining holdings in ARM stock, consisting of 278,000 shares for net proceeds of approximately $295,000, and a gain before taxes of
$270,000. 
During
the first quarter of 2002, the Company sold 4.7 million shares of ARM stock for both net proceeds and a gain before taxes of $21 million. No sales of ARM were made in any of the
subsequent quarters of fiscal 2002. As of September 28, 2002, the Company held 278,000 shares of ARM stock valued at $578,000. 
During
2001, the Company sold a total of approximately 29.8 million shares of ARM stock for net proceeds of approximately $176 million, recorded a gain before taxes of approximately
$174 million, and recognized related income tax expense of approximately $52 million. 
75




  
Samsung  
During the fourth quarter of 1999, the Company invested $100 million in Samsung to assist in the further expansion of Samsung's TFT-LCD
flat-panel display production capacity. The investment was in the form of three year unsecured bonds, which were convertible into approximately 550,000 shares of Samsung common stock
beginning in July 2000. The bonds carried an annual coupon rate of 2% and paid a total yield to maturity of 5% if redeemed at maturity. 
Prior
to its sale, the Company had categorized its investment in Samsung as available-for-sale requiring that it be carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net
of taxes, reported in equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. The fair value of the Company's investment in Samsung was approximately $123 million as of
September 30, 2000. With the adoption of SFAS No. 133 on October 1, 2000, the Company was required to account for the conversion option embedded in the Samsung bonds separately
from the related debt. The conversion feature was carried at fair value with any changes in fair value recognized in earnings in the period in which they occur. Included in the $17 million
gross SFAS No. 133 transition adjustment recorded in earnings during the first quarter of fiscal 2001 was a $23 million favorable adjustment for the restatement to fair value as of
October 1, 2000, of the derivative component of the Company's investment in Samsung. To adjust the carrying value of the derivative component of its investment in Samsung to fair value as of
December 30, 2000, the Company recognized an unrealized loss of approximately $13 million during the first quarter of 2001. During the second quarter of 2001, the Company sold this
investment for book value, including accrued interest, and received net proceeds of approximately $117 million. 
Other Strategic Investments  
The Company has made additional minority debt and equity investments in several privately held technology companies, which were reflected in the consolidated balance sheets in
other assets. These investments were inherently risky because the products and/or markets of these companies were typically not fully developed. During 2002 and 2001, the Company determined that the
decline in fair value of certain of these investments was other-than-temporary and, accordingly, recognized a charge to earnings of $15 million and $8 million,
respectively. These charges
were included in gains (losses) on non-current investments, net. As of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002, the Company had no private debt or equity investments
reflected in its consolidated balance sheets. 
Note 3—Consolidated Financial Statement Details (in millions)  
Inventories  



 
 
2003
 
2002


Purchased parts
 
$
2
 
$
9


Work in process
 
 
4
 
 
—


Finished goods
 
 
50
 
 
36


 
 

 



Total inventories
 
$
56
 
$
45


 
 

 




76


 
Other Current Assets  



 
 
2003
 
2002


Vendor non-trade receivables
 
$
184
 
$
142


Other current assets
 
 
125
 
 
133


 
 

 



Total other current assets
 
$
309
 
$
275


 
 

 




Property, Plant, and Equipment  



 
 
2003
 
2002


Land and buildings
 
$
350
 
$
342 


Machinery, equipment, and internal-use software
 
 
393
 
 
367 


Office furniture and equipment
 
 
74
 
 
67 


Leasehold improvements
 
 
357
 
 
281 


 
 

 



 
 
 
1,174
 
 
1,057 


Accumulated depreciation and amortization
 
 
(505
)
 
(436)


 
 

 



Net property, plant, and equipment
 
$
669
 
$
621 


 
 

 




Other Assets  



 
 
2003
 
2002


Non-current deferred tax assets
 
$
60
 
$
70


Non-current debt and equity investments
 
 
5
 
 
39


Capitalized software development costs, net
 
 
28
 
 
19


Other assets
 
 
57
 
 
42


 
 

 



Total other assets
 
$
150
 
$
170


 
 

 




Accrued Expenses  



 
 
2003
 
2002


Deferred revenue
 
$
368
 
$
240


Accrued marketing and distribution
 
 
124
 
 
136


Accrued compensation and employee benefits
 
 
101
 
 
93


Accrued warranty and related costs
 
 
67
 
 
69


Other current liabilities
 
 
239
 
 
209


 
 

 



Total accrued expenses
 
$
899
 
$
747


 
 

 




77


 
Interest and Other Income, Net  



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Interest income
 
$
69
 
$
118
 
$
218
 


Interest expense
 
 
(8
)
 
(11
)
 
(16
)


Gains on sales of short term investments
 
 
21
 
 
7
 
 
—
 


Other income (expense) net
 
 
(5
)
 
(2
)
 
15
 


Gain on forward purchase agreement
 
 
6
 
 
—
 
 
—
 


 
 

 

 

 


Total interest and other income, net
 
$
83
 
$
112
 
$
217
 


 
 

 

 

 



Note 4—Acquisitions  
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets  
The Company is currently amortizing its acquired intangible assets with definite lives over periods ranging from 3 to 10 years. The Company ceased amortization of
goodwill at the beginning of fiscal 2002 when it adopted SFAS No. 142. 
The
following table summarizes the components of gross and net intangible asset balances (in millions): 



 
 
September 27, 2003
 
September 28, 2002


 
 
Gross Carrying
Amount
 
Accumulated
Amortization
 
Net
Carrying
Amount
 
Gross Carrying
Amount
 
Accumulated
Amortization
 
Net Carrying
Amount


Goodwill (a)
 
$
85
 
 
—
 
$
85
 
$
85
 
 
—
 
$
85


Other acquired intangible assets
 
 
5
 
 
(5
)
 
—
 
 
5
 
 
(5
)
 
—


Acquired technology
 
 
42
 
 
(18
)
 
24
 
 
42
 
 
(8
)
 
34


 
 

 

 

 

 

 



Total acquired intangible assets
 
$
132
 
$
(23
)
$
109
 
$
132
 
$
(13
)
$
119


 
 

 

 

 

 

 






(a)Accumulated
amortization related to goodwill of $55 million arising prior to the adoption of SFAS No. 142 has been reflected in the gross carrying amount of goodwill as
of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002. 
Expected
annual amortization expense related to acquired technology is as follows (in millions): 



Fiscal Years:
 
 
 


 
2004
 
$
7


 
2005
 
 
5


 
2006
 
 
3


 
2007
 
 
2


 
Thereafter
 
 
7


 
 



Total expected annual amortization expense
 
$
24


 
 




78


 
Amortization
expense related to acquired intangible assets is as follows (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001


Goodwill amortization
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
16


Other acquired intangible assets amortization
 
 
—
 
 
1
 
 
3


Acquired technology amortization
 
 
10
 
 
5
 
 
2


 
 

 

 



Total amortization
 
$
10
 
$
6
 
$
21


 
 

 

 




Net
loss and net loss per share adjusted to exclude amortization of goodwill in fiscal periods prior to the adoption of SFAS No. 142 in fiscal 2002 follows (in millions, except per share
amounts): 



 
 
2001
 


Net loss, as reported
 
$
(25
)


Add: goodwill amortization
 
$
16
 


 
 

 


Net loss, as adjusted
 
$
(9
)


 
 

 



Basic loss per share, as reported
 
$

(0.07
)


Add: goodwill amortization
 
$
0.04
 


 
 

 


Basic loss per share, as adjusted
 
$
(0.03
)


 
 

 



Diluted loss per share, as reported
 
$

(0.07
)


Add: goodwill amortization
 
$
0.04
 


 
 

 


Diluted loss per share, as adjusted
 
$
(0.03
)


 
 

 



Acquisition of Emagic GmbH  
During the fourth quarter of 2002, the Company acquired Emagic GmbH (Emagic), a provider of professional software solutions for computer based music production, for
approximately $30 million in cash; $26 million of which was paid immediately upon closing of the deal and $4 million of which was held-back for future payment
contingent on continued employment by certain employees that will be allocated to future compensation expense in the appropriate periods over the next 3 years. During fiscal 2003, contingent
consideration totaling $1.3 million was paid. The acquisition has been accounted for as a purchase. The portion of the purchase price allocated to purchased in-process research and
development (IPR&D) was expensed immediately, and the portion of the purchase price allocated to acquired technology and to tradename will be amortized over their estimated useful lives of
3 years. Goodwill associated with the acquisition of Emagic is not subject to amortization pursuant to the provisions of SFAS No. 142. Total consideration was allocated as follows (in
millions): 



Net tangible assets acquired
 
$
2.3


Acquired technology
 
 
3.8


Tradename
 
 
0.8


In-process research and development
 
 
0.5


Goodwill
 
 
18.6


 
 



 
Total consideration
 
$
26.0


 
 




79


 
The
amount of the purchase price allocated to IPR&D was expensed upon acquisition, because the technological feasibility of products under development had not been established and no alternative
future uses existed. The IPR&D relates primarily to Emagic's Logic series technology and extensions. At the date of the acquisition, the products under development were between 43%-83%
complete, and it was expected that the remaining work would be completed during the Company's fiscal 2003 at a cost of approximately $415,000. The remaining efforts, which were completed in 2003,
included finalizing user interface design and development, and testing. The fair value of the IPR&D was determined using an income approach, which reflects the projected free cash flows that will be
generated by the IPR&D projects and that are attributable to the acquired technology, and discounting the projected net cash flows back to their present value using a discount rate of 25%. 
Acquisition of certain assets of Zayante, Inc., Prismo Graphics, and Silicon Grail  
During fiscal 2002 the Company acquired certain technology and patent rights of Zayante, Inc., Prismo Graphics, and Silicon Grail Corporation for a total of
$20 million in cash. These transactions have been accounted for as asset acquisitions. The purchase price for these asset acquisitions, except for $1 million identified as contingent
consideration which will be allocated to compensation expense over the next 3 years, has been allocated to acquired technology and will be amortized on a straight-line basis over
3 years, except for certain assets acquired from Zayante associated with patent royalty streams that will be amortized over 10 years. 
Acquisition of Nothing Real, LLC  
During the second quarter of 2002, the Company acquired certain assets of Nothing Real, LLC (Nothing Real), a privately-held company that develops and markets high
performance tools designed for the digital image creation market. Of the $15 million purchase price, the Company has allocated $7 million to acquired technology, which will be amortized
over its estimated life of 5 years. The remaining $8 million, which has been identified as contingent consideration, rather than recorded as an additional component of the cost of the
acquired assets, will be allocated to future compensation expense in the appropriate periods over the next 3 years. 
Acquisition of Spruce Technologies, Inc.  
In July 2001, the Company acquired Spruce Technologies, Inc. (Spruce), a privately-held company that develops and markets DVD authoring products, for
$14.9 million in cash. Goodwill associated with the acquisition of Spruce is not subject to amortization pursuant to the transition provisions of SFAS No. 142. The consolidated financial
statements include the operating results of Spruce from the date of acquisition. Total consideration was allocated as follows (in millions): 



Net tangible liabilities assumed
 
$
(0.7
)


Identifiable intangible assets
 
 
5.9
 


Goodwill
 
 
9.7
 


 
 

 


 
Total consideration
 
$
14.9
 


 
 

 



Acquisition of PowerSchool, Inc.  
In May 2001, the Company acquired PowerSchool, Inc. (PowerSchool), a provider of web-based student information systems for K-12 schools
and districts that enable schools to record, access, report, and manage their student data and performance in real-time, and gives parents real-time web access to track 
80


 
their
children's progress. The consolidated financial statements include the operating results of PowerSchool from the date of acquisition. 
The
purchase price of approximately $66.1 million consisted of the issuance of approximately 2.4 million shares of the Company's common stock with a fair value of $61.2 million,
the issuance of stock options with a fair value of $4.5 million, and $300,000 of direct transaction costs. The fair value of the common stock options issued was determined using a Black-Scholes
option pricing model with the following assumptions: volatility of 67%, expected life of 4 years, dividend rate of 0%, and risk-free rate of 4.73%. 
Total
consideration was allocated as follows (in millions): 



Net tangible assets acquired
 
$
0.2


Deferred stock compensation
 
 
12.8


Identifiable intangible assets
 
 
2.6


In-process research and development
 
 
10.8


Goodwill
 
 
39.7


 
 



 
Total consideration
 
$
66.1


 
 




The
amount of the purchase price allocated to IPR&D was expensed upon acquisition, because the technological feasibility of products under development had not been established and no alternative
future uses existed. The IPR&D relates to technologies representing processes and expertise employed to design, develop, and deploy a functioning, scalable web-based student information
system for use by K-12 schools. At the date of the acquisition, the product under development was approximately 50% complete, and it was expected that the remaining 50% would be completed
during the Company's fiscal 2002 at a cost of approximately $9.25 million. The remaining efforts, which were completed in 2002, included completion of coding, finalizing user interface design
and development, and testing. The fair value of the IPR&D was determined using an income approach, which reflects the projected free cash flows that will be generated by the IPR&D projects and that
are attributable to the acquired technology, and discounting the projected net cash flows back to their present value using a discount rate of 25%. The acquired intangibles are being amortized over
their estimated useful lives of 3 years. Deferred stock compensation associated with restricted stock and options is being amortized over the required future vesting period of 3 years. 
In
the fourth quarter of 2001, an adjustment was made to increase goodwill associated with the acquisition of PowerSchool by $5.9 million due to the identification of previously unidentified
loss contingencies that were in existence prior to consummation of the acquisition. 
The
Company allocated $12.8 million of its purchase consideration for PowerSchool to deferred stock compensation within shareholders' equity. This amount represented the intrinsic value of
stock options assumed that vest as future services are provided by employees and related to 445,000 common shares issued contingent on continued employment of certain PowerSchool employee
stockholders. Certain PowerSchool employee stockholders were terminated in the first quarter of 2003 resulting in the $5 million recognition of previously deferred stock compensation as part of
the Company's first quarter restructuring action. Unamortized PowerSchool related deferred stock compensation of approximately $294,000 remains as of September 27, 2003. 
Pro Forma Financial Information  
The unaudited pro forma financial information below presents the condensed consolidated financial results of the Company assuming that PowerSchool and Spruce, acquired in 2001,
had been acquired at the 
81


 
beginning
of 2001 and includes the effect of amortization of goodwill and other acquired identifiable intangible assets from that date. The impact of the charge for IPR&D associated with the
acquisition of PowerSchool has been excluded. This pro forma financial information is presented for informational purposes only and is not necessarily indicative of the results of future operations
that would have been achieved had the acquisitions taken place at the beginning of 2001. Pro forma information follows (in millions, except per share amounts): 



 
 
2001
 


Net sales
 
$
5,370
 


Net loss
 
$
(44
)


Basic loss per common share
 
$
(0.13
)


Diluted loss per common share
 
$
(0.13
)



Note 5—Restructuring Charges  
Fiscal 2003 Restructuring Actions  
The Company recorded total restructuring charges of approximately $26.8 million during the year ended September 27, 2003, including approximately
$7.4 million in severance costs, a $5.0 million charge to write-off deferred compensation, $7.1 million in asset impairments and a $7.3 million
charge for lease cancellations. Of the $26.8 million, nearly all had been spent by the end of 2003, except for approximately $400,000 of severance costs and approximately $4.5 million
related to operating lease costs on abandoned facilities. During the third quarter of 2003, approximately $500,000 of the amount originally accrued for lease cancellations was determined to be in
excess due to the sublease of a property sooner than originally estimated and an approximately $500,000 shortfall was identified in the severance accrual due to higher than expected severance costs
related to the closure of the Company's Singapore manufacturing operations. These adjustments had no net effect on reported operating expense. 
During
the second quarter of 2003, the Company's management approved and initiated restructuring actions that resulted in recognition of a total restructuring charge of $2.8 million, including
$2.4 million in severance costs and $400,000 for asset write-offs and lease payments on an abandoned facility. Actions taken in the second quarter were for the most part
supplemental to actions initiated in the prior two quarters and focused on further headcount reductions in various sales and marketing functions in the Company's Americas and Europe operating segments
and further reductions associated with PowerSchool-related activities in the Americas operating segment, including an accrual for asset write-offs and lease payments on an abandoned
facility. The second quarter actions resulted in the termination of 93 employees, 92 were terminated prior to the end of 2003. 
During
the first quarter of 2003, the Company's management approved and initiated restructuring actions with a total cost of $24 million that resulted in the termination of manufacturing
operations at the Company-owned facility in Singapore, further reductions in headcount resulting from the shift in PowerSchool product strategy that took place at the end of fiscal 2002, and
termination of various sales and marketing activities in the United States and Europe. These restructuring actions will ultimately result in the elimination of 260 positions worldwide, all but one of
which were eliminated by the end of 2003. 
Closure
of the Company's Singapore manufacturing operations resulted in severance costs of $1.8 million and costs of $6.7 million to write-off manufacturing related fixed
assets, whose use ceased during the first quarter. PowerSchool related costs included severance of approximately $550,000 and recognition of $5 million of previously deferred stock compensation
that arose when PowerSchool was acquired by the 
82


 

Company
in 2001 related to certain PowerSchool employee stockholders who were terminated in the first quarter of 2003. Termination of sales and marketing activities and employees, principally in the
United States and Europe, resulted in severance costs of $2.8 million and accrual of costs associated with operating leases on closed facilities of $6.7 million. The total net
restructuring charge of $23 million recognized during the first quarter of 2003 also reflects the reversal of $600,000 of unused restructuring accrual originally made during the first quarter
of 2002. 
Except
for certain costs associated with operating leases on closed facilities, the Company currently anticipates that all of the remaining accrual for severance costs of approximately $400,000 will
be spent by the end of the first quarter of fiscal 2004. 
The
following table summarizes activity associated with restructuring actions initiated during fiscal 2003 (in millions): 



 
 
Employee
Severance
Benefits
 
Deferred
Compensation
Write-off
 
Asset
Impairments
 
Lease
Cancellations
 
Totals
 


Total charge
 
$
7.4
 
$
5.0
 
$
7.1
 
$
7.3
 
$
26.8
 


Total spending through September 27, 2003
 
 
(7.5
)
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(2.3
)
 
(9.8
)


Total non-cash items
 
 
—
 
 
(5.0
)
 
(7.1
)
 
—
 
 
(12.1
)


Adjustments
 
 
0.5
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(0.5
)
 
—
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 


Accrual at September 27, 2003
 
$
0.4
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
4.5
 
$
4.9
 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 



Fiscal 2002 Restructuring Actions  
During fiscal 2002, the Company recorded total restructuring charges of approximately $30 million related to actions intended to eliminate certain activities and better
align the Company's operating expenses with existing general economic conditions and to partially offset the cost of continuing investments in new product development and investments in the Company's
Retail operating segment. 
During
the fourth quarter of 2002, the Company's management approved and initiated restructuring actions with a total cost of approximately $6 million designed to reduce headcount costs in
corporate operations and sales and to adjust its PowerSchool product strategy. These restructuring actions resulted in the elimination of approximately 180 positions worldwide at a cost of
$1.8 million, all of which were eliminated by September 27, 2003. Eliminated positions were primarily in corporate operations, sales, and PowerSchool related research and development in
the Americas operating segment. The shift in product strategy at PowerSchool included discontinuing development and marketing of PowerSchool's PSE product. This shift resulted in the impairment of
previously capitalized development costs associated with the PSE product in the amount of $4.5 million. 
During
the first quarter of 2002, the Company's management approved and initiated restructuring actions with a total cost of approximately $24 million. These restructuring actions resulted in
the elimination of approximately 425 positions worldwide at a cost of $8 million. Positions were eliminated primarily in the Company's operations, information systems, and administrative
functions. In addition, these restructuring actions also included significant changes in the Company's information systems strategy resulting in termination of equipment leases and cancellation of
existing projects and activities. The Company ceased using the assets associated with first quarter 2002 restructuring actions during that same quarter. Related lease and contract cancellation charges
totaled $12 million, and charges for asset impairments totaled 
83


 

$4 million.
The first quarter 2002 restructuring actions were primarily related to corporate activity not allocated to operating segments. During the first quarter of 2003, the Company reversed
the remaining unused accrual of $600,000. 
The
following table summarizes activity associated with restructuring actions initiated during fiscal 2002 (in millions): 



 
 
Employee
Severance
Benefits
 
Asset
Impairments
 
Lease and
Contract
Cancellations
 
Totals
 


Total charge
 
$
10
 
$
8
 
$
12
 
$
30
 


Total spending through September 27, 2003
 
 
(10
)
 
—
 
 
(11
)
 
(21
)


Total non-cash items
 
 
—
 
 
(8
)
 
—
 
 
(8
)


Adjustments
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(1
)


 
 

 

 

 

 


Accrual at September 27, 2003
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 
$
—
 


 
 

 

 

 

 



Note 6—Income Taxes  
The
provision for income taxes consisted of the following (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Federal:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Current
 
$
18
 
$
12
 
$
(20
)


 
Deferred
 
 
(7
)
 
(32
)
 
(8
)


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
 
11
 
 
(20
)
 
(28
)


 
 

 

 

 


State:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Current
 
 
4
 
 
3
 
 
—
 


 
Deferred
 
 
(11
)
 
6
 
 
(10
)


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
 
(7
)
 
9
 
 
(10
)


 
 

 

 

 


Foreign:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Current
 
 
21
 
 
29
 
 
21
 


 
Deferred
 
 
(1
)
 
4
 
 
2
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
 
 
20
 
 
33
 
 
23
 


 
 

 

 

 


Provision for income taxes
 
$
24
 
$
22
 
$
(15
)


 
 

 

 

 



84



  
The
foreign provision for income taxes is based on foreign pretax earnings of approximately $250 million, $284 million and $363 million in 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. As
of September 27, 2003, approximately $2.5 billion of the Company's cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments are held by foreign subsidiaries and are generally based
in U.S. dollar-denominated holdings. Amounts held by foreign subsidiaries would be subject to U.S. income taxation on repatriation to the United States. The Company's consolidated financial statements
fully provide for any related tax liability on amounts that may be repatriated, aside from undistributed earnings of certain of the Company's foreign subsidiaries that are intended to be indefinitely
reinvested in operations outside the United States. U.S. income taxes have not been provided on a cumulative total of $822 million of such earnings. It is not practicable to determine the
income tax liability that might be incurred if these earnings were to be distributed. 
Deferred
tax assets and liabilities reflect the effects of tax losses, credits, and the future income tax effects of temporary differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts
of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and are measured using enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected
to be recovered or settled. 
As
of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002, the significant components of the Company's deferred tax assets and liabilities were (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002


Deferred tax assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Accounts receivable and inventory reserves
 
$
35
 
$
32


 
Accrued liabilities and other reserves
 
 
155
 
 
126


 
Basis of capital assets and investments
 
 
47
 
 
34


 
Tax losses and credits
 
 
204
 
 
125


 
Other
 
 
11
 
 
11


 
 

 



 
Total deferred tax assets
 
 
452
 
 
328


Less valuation allowance
 
 
30
 
 
30


 
 

 



Net deferred tax assets
 
 
422
 
 
298


 
 

 



Deferred tax liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Unremitted earnings of subsidiaries
 
 
398
 
 
293


 
Available-for-sale securities
 
 
—
 
 
1


 
 

 



 
Total deferred tax liabilities
 
 
398
 
 
294


 
 

 



Net deferred tax asset
 
$
24
 
$
4


 
 

 




As
of September 27, 2003, the Company had operating loss carryforwards for federal tax purposes of approximately $189 million, which expire from 2011 through 2023. A portion of these
carryforwards was acquired from NeXT and other acquisitions, the utilization of which is subject to certain limitations imposed by the Internal Revenue Code. The Company also has Federal credit
carryforwards and various state and foreign tax loss and credit carryforwards, the tax effect of which is approximately $117 million and which expire between 2004 and 2023. The remaining
benefits from tax losses and credits do not expire. As of September 27, 2003, a valuation allowance of $30 million was recorded against the deferred tax asset for the benefits of tax
losses that may not be realized. The valuation allowance relates primarily to the operating loss carryforwards acquired from NeXT and other acquisitions. Management believes it is more likely than not
that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax 
85


 

planning
strategies, together with the tax effects of the deferred tax liabilities, will be sufficient to fully recover the remaining deferred tax assets. 
A
reconciliation of the provision for income taxes, with the amount computed by applying the statutory federal income tax rate (35% in 2003, 2002, and 2001) to income (loss) before provision for
(benefit from) income taxes, is as follows (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Computed expected tax (benefit)
 
$
32
 
$
30
 
$
(18
)


State taxes, net of federal effect
 
 
(4
)
 
7
 
 
(7
)


Indefinitely invested earnings of foreign subsidiaries
 
 
(13
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


Nondeductible executive compensation
 
 
5
 
 
(1
)
 
—
 


Stock repurchase
 
 
(2
)
 
—
 
 
—
 


Purchase accounting and asset acquisitions
 
 
4
 
 
3
 
 
10
 


Change in valuation allowance
 
 
—
 
 
(16
)
 
—
 


Research & development credit, net
 
 
(7
)
 
(8
)
 
(5
)


Nondeductible expenses
 
 
6
 
 
4
 
 
3
 


Other items
 
 
3
 
 
3
 
 
2
 


 
 

 

 

 


Provision for (benefit from) income taxes
 
$
24
 
$
22
 
$
(15
)


 
 

 

 

 


Effective tax rate
 
 
26
%
 
25
%
 
30
%



On
April 10, 2003, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) completed its audit of the Company's federal income tax returns for the years 1998 through 2000 and proposed certain adjustments. Certain
of these adjustments are being contested through the IRS Appeals Office. Substantially all IRS audit issues for years prior to 1998 have been resolved. Management believes that adequate provision has
been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. Should any issues addressed in the Company's tax audits be
resolved in a manner not consistent with management's expectations, the Company could be required to adjust its provision for income tax in the period such resolution occurs. 
Note 7—Shareholders' Equity  
CEO Restricted Stock Award  
On March 19, 2003, the Company entered into an Option Cancellation and Restricted Stock Award Agreement (the Agreement) with Steven P. Jobs, its Chief Executive Officer
(CEO). The Agreement cancelled stock option awards for the purchase of 27.5 million shares of the Company's common stock previously granted to Mr. Jobs in 2000 and 2001. Mr. Jobs
retained options to purchase 60,000 shares of the Company's common stock granted in August of 1997 in his capacity as a member of the Company's Board of Directors, prior to becoming the Company's CEO.
The Agreement replaced the cancelled options with a restricted stock award of 5 million shares of the Company's common stock. The restricted stock award generally vests three years from date of
grant. Vesting of some or all of the restricted shares will be accelerated in the event Mr. Jobs is terminated without cause, dies, or has his management role reduced following a change in
control of the Company. 
The
Company has recorded the value of the restricted stock award of $74.75 million as a component of shareholders' equity and is amortizing that amount on a straight-line basis over
the 3-year service/vesting period. The value of the restricted stock award was based on the closing market price of the Company's 
86


 

common
stock on the date of the award. Total amortization of approximately $13 million has been included in selling, general, and administrative expense in 2003 and will continue to be included
at approximately $6.2 million per quarter through March 2006. The 5 million restricted shares have been included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share utilizing the
treasury stock method. 
Stock Repurchase Plan  
In July 1999, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a plan for the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock. This repurchase plan does
not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares or acquire shares over any specified period of time. 
During
the fourth quarter of 2001, the Company entered into a forward purchase agreement to acquire 1.5 million shares of its common stock in September of 2003 at an average price of $16.64 per
share for a total cost of $25.5 million. In August 2003, the Company settled this agreement prior to its maturity, at which time the Company's common stock had a fair value of $22.81.
Other than this forward purchase transaction, the Company has not engaged in any transactions to repurchase its common stock since fiscal 2000. Since inception of the stock repurchase plan, the
Company had repurchased a total of 6.55 million shares at a cost of $217 million. The Company was authorized to repurchase up to an additional $283 million of its common stock as
of September 27, 2003. 
Preferred Stock  
In August 1997, the Company and Microsoft Corporation (Microsoft) entered into patent cross license and technology agreements. In addition, Microsoft purchased 150,000
shares of Apple Series A nonvoting convertible preferred stock ("preferred stock") for $150 million. These shares were convertible by Microsoft after August 5, 2000, into shares
of the Company's common stock at a conversion price of $8.25 per share. During 2000, 74,250 shares of preferred stock were converted to 9 million shares of the Company's common stock. During
2001, the remaining 75,750 preferred shares were converted into 9.2 million shares of the Company's common stock. 
Comprehensive Income  
Comprehensive income consists of two components, net income and other comprehensive income. Other comprehensive income refers to revenue, expenses, gains and losses that under
generally accepted accounting principles are recorded as an element of shareholders' equity but are excluded from net income. The Company's other comprehensive income consists of foreign currency
translation adjustments from those subsidiaries not using the U.S. dollar as their functional currency, unrealized gains and losses on marketable securities categorized as
available-for-sale, and net deferred gains and losses on certain derivative instruments accounted for as cash flow hedges. 
The
following table summarizes the components of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Unrealized gains on available-for-sale securities
 
$
1
 
$
13
 
$
30
 


Unrealized gains (losses) on derivative investments
 
 
(16
)
 
(11
)
 
4
 


Cumulative foreign currency translation
 
 
(20
)
 
(51
)
 
(56
)


 
 

 

 

 


Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
 
$
(35
)
$
(49
)
$
(22
)


 
 

 

 

 



87


 
The
following table summarizes activity in other comprehensive income related to available-for-sale securities, net of taxes (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Change in fair value of available-for-sale securities
 
$
11
 
$
(49
)
$
(183
)


Adjustment for net (gains) losses realized and included in net income (loss)
 
 
(23
)
 
32
 
 
(84
)


 
 

 

 

 


Change in unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities
 
$
(12
)
$
(17
)
$
(267
)


 
 

 

 

 



The
tax effect related to the change in unrealized gain on available-for-sale securities was $6 million, $10 million, $157 million for fiscal 2003, 2002,
and 2001, respectively. The tax effect on the reclassification adjustment for net gains (losses) included in net income (loss) was $(8) million, $10 million and $35 million for fiscal
2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. 
The
following table summarizes activity in other comprehensive income related to derivatives, net of taxes, held by the Company (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Changes in fair value of derivatives
 
$
(24
)
$
4
 
$
45
 


Adjustment for net gains realized and included in net income (loss)
 
 
19
 
 
(19
)
 
(53
)


Cumulative effect of adopting SFAS No. 133
 
 
—
 
 
—
 
 
12
 


 
 

 

 

 


Change in unrealized gain on derivative instruments
 
$
(5
)
$
(15
)
$
4
 


 
 

 

 

 



The
tax effect related to the cumulative effect of adopting SFAS No. 133 was $(5) as of September 29, 2001. The tax effect related to the changes in fair value of derivatives was
$11 million, $(2) million and $(19) million for fiscal 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. The tax effect related to derivative gains (losses) reclassified from other comprehensive income was
$(7) million, $8 million and $23 million for fiscal 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. 
Note 8—Employee Benefit Plans  
2003 Employee Stock Option Plan  
At the Annual Meeting of Shareholders held on April 24, 2003, the shareholders approved an amendment to the 1998 Executive Officer Stock Plan to change the name of the
plan to the 2003 Employee Stock Option Plan (the 2003 Plan), to provide for broad-based grants to all employees in addition to executive officers and other key employees and to prohibit future
"repricings" of employee stock options, including
6-months-plus-1-day option exchange programs, without shareholder approval. Based on the terms of individual option grants, options granted under the
2003 Plan generally expire 7 to 10 years after the grant date and generally become exercisable over a period of 4 years, based on continued employment, with either annual or quarterly
vesting. The 2003 Plan permits the granting of incentive stock options, nonstatutory stock options, restricted stock, stock appreciation rights, and stock purchase rights. 
1997 Employee Stock Option Plan  
In August 1997, the Company's Board of Directors approved the 1997 Employee Stock Option Plan (the 1997 Plan), a non-shareholder approved plan for grants of
stock options to employees who are not officers of the Company. Options may be granted under the 1997 Plan to employees at not less than the fair market value on the date of grant. Based on the terms
of individual option grants, options granted under the 1997 
88


 
Plan
generally expire 7 to 10 years after the grant date and generally become exercisable over a period of 4 years, based on continued employment, with either annual or quarterly
vesting. As a result of shareholder approval of amendments to the 1998 Executive Officer Stock Plan in April 2003, the Company terminated the 1997 Employee Stock Option Plan and cancelled all
remaining unissued shares, following the completion of an employee stock option exchange program in October 2003. 
Employee Stock Option Exchange Program  
On March 20, 2003, the Company announced a voluntary employee stock option exchange program (the Exchange Program) whereby eligible employees, other than executive
officers and members of the Board of Directors, had an opportunity to exchange outstanding options with exercise prices at or above $25.00 per share for a predetermined smaller number of new stock
options issued with exercise prices equal to the fair market value of one share of the Company's common stock on the day the new awards are issued, which would be at least six months plus one day
after the exchange options are cancelled. On April 17, 2003, in accordance with the Exchange Program, the Company accepted and cancelled options to purchase 16,569,193 shares of its common
stock. On October 22, 2003, new stock options totaling 6,697,368 shares were issued to employees at an exercise price of $22.76 per share, which is equivalent to the closing price of the
Company's stock on that date. No financial or accounting impact to the Company's financial position, results of operations or cash flow was associated with this transaction. 
1997 Director Stock Option Plan  
In August 1997, the Company's Board of Directors adopted a shareholder approved Director Stock Option Plan (DSOP) for non-employee directors of the Company.
Initial grants of 30,000 options under the DSOP vest in three equal installments on each of the first through third
anniversaries of the date of grant, and subsequent annual grants of 10,000 options are fully vested at grant. 
Rule 10b5-1 Trading Plans  
Certain of the Company's executive officers, including Mr. Timothy D. Cook and Mr. Fred D. Anderson, have entered into trading plans pursuant to
Rule 10b5-1(c)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. A trading plan is a written document that pre-establishes the amounts, prices and dates (or formula
for determining the amounts, prices and dates) of future purchases or sales of Apple stock including the exercise and sale of employee stock options and shares acquired pursuant to the Company's
Employee Stock Purchase Plan. 
Employee Stock Purchase Plan  
The Company has a shareholder approved employee stock purchase plan (the Purchase Plan), under which substantially all employees may purchase common stock through payroll
deductions at a price equal to 85% of the lower of the fair market values as of the beginning and end of six-month offering periods. Stock purchases under the Purchase Plan are limited to
10% of an employee's compensation, up to a maximum of $25,000 in any calendar year. In the third quarter of 2003, the Company's shareholders also approved an amendment to the Employee Stock Purchase
Plan to increase the number of shares authorized for issuance by 4 million shares. Beginning with the six-month offering period that started on June 30, 2003, the number of
shares authorized for issuance is limited to a total of 1 million shares per offering period. During 2003, 2002, and 2001, 2.1 million, 1.8 million and 1.8 million shares,
respectively, were issued under the Purchase Plan. As of September 27, 2003, approximately 4.0 million shares were reserved for future issuance under the Purchase Plan. 
89


 
Employee Savings Plan  
The Company has an employee savings plan (the Savings Plan) qualifying as a deferred salary arrangement under Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Under the
Savings Plan, participating U.S. employees may defer a portion of their pre-tax earnings, up to the Internal Revenue Service annual contribution limit ($12,000 for calendar year 2003). The
Company matches 50% to 100% of each employee's contributions, depending on length of service, up to a maximum 6% of the employee's earnings. The Company's matching contributions to the Savings Plan
were approximately $21 million, $19 million, and $17 million in 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. 
Stock Option Activity  
A summary of the Company's stock option activity and related information for the years ended September 27, 2003, September 28, 2002 and September 29, 2001
follows (option amounts are presented in thousands): 



 
 
 
 
Outstanding Options


 
 
Shares Available
for Grant
 
Number of
Shares
 
Weighted Average
Exercise Price


Balance at 9/30/00
 
11,530
 
70,758
 
$
34.01


 
Additional Options Authorized
 
27,000
 
—
 
 
—


 
Options Granted
 
(34,857
)
34,857
 
$
18.58


 
Options Cancelled
 
6,605
 
(6,605
)
$
29.32


 
Options Exercised
 
—
 
(1,831
)
$
10.05


 
Plan Shares Expired
 
(203
)
—
 
 
—


 
 

 

 
 
 


Balance at 9/29/01
 
10,075
 
97,179
 
$
29.24


 
Additional Options Authorized
 
15,000
 
—
 
 
—


 
Options Granted
 
(23,239
)
23,239
 
$
19.89


 
Options Cancelled
 
4,737
 
(4,737
)
$
30.98


 
Options Exercised
 
—
 
(6,251
)
$
11.99


 
Plan Shares Expired
 
(2
)
—
 
 
—


 
 

 

 
 
 


Balance at 9/28/02
 
6,571
 
109,430
 
$
28.17


 
Restricted Stock Granted
 
(5,000
)
—
 
$
14.95


 
Options Granted
 
(4,179
)
4,179
 
$
16.38


 
Options Cancelled
 
48,443
 
(48,443
)
$
39.61


 
Options Exercised
 
—
 
(2,154
)
$
14.04


 
Plan Shares Expired
 
(5
)
—
 
 
—


 
 

 

 
 
 


Balance at 9/27/03
 
45,830
 
63,012
 
$
19.08


 
 

 

 
 
 



Total
options outstanding at September 27, 2003 to purchase approximately 63 million shares do not include options to purchase approximately 6.7 million shares that were issued in
October 2003 pursuant to the Exchange Program described above. 
90


 

The
options outstanding as of September 27, 2003 have been segregated into six ranges for additional disclosure as follows (option amounts are presented in thousands): 



 
 
Options Outstanding
 
Options Exercisable


 
 
Options
Outstanding as of
September 27,
2003
 
Weighted-
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life in Years
 
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
 
Options
Exercisable as of
September 27,
2003
 
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price


$0.83-$15.59
 
11,216
 
5.49
 
$
11.83
 
8,237
 
$
10.83


$15.60-$17.31
 
11,936
 
6.41
 
$
17.00
 
7,022
 
$
17.07


$17.32-$18.50
 
17,843
 
7.04
 
$
18.43
 
11,903
 
$
18.43


$18.51-$22.21
 
14,416
 
7.88
 
$
20.31
 
6,886
 
$
20.27


$22.22-$38.81
 
5,006
 
7.49
 
$
24.03
 
2,844
 
$
24.29


$38.82-$69.78
 
2,595
 
6.28
 
$
48.08
 
1,864
 
$
48.11


 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 


$0.83-$69.78
 
63,012
 
6.84
 
$
19.08
 
38,756
 
$
18.75


 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 



As
of September 28, 2002, the Company had exercisable options to purchase 57.9 million shares outstanding with a weighted average exercise price of $30.85 per share. As of
September 29, 2001, the Company had exercisable options to purchase 42.1 million shares outstanding with a weighted average exercise price of $32.15. 
Note 9—Stock-Based Compensation  
The
Company has provided pro forma disclosures in Note 1 of these Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of the effect on net income (loss) and earnings (loss) per share as if the fair
value method of accounting for stock compensation had been used for its employee stock option grants and employee stock purchase plan purchases. These pro forma effects have been estimated at the date
of grant and beginning of the period, respectively, using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. 
For
purposes of the pro forma disclosures provided pursuant to SFAS No. 123, the option awards issued in October 2003 and the awards cancelled as part of the Exchange Program have been
accounted for using modification accounting. In accordance with SFAS No. 123, the grant date of the awards issued is the date of acceptance of the exchange offer by participating employees. The
cancellation of certain of the Company's Chief Executive Officer's options and replacement with restricted shares in March 2003 is also being accounted for using modification accounting for
purposes of the pro forma disclosures provided pursuant to SFAS No. 123. 
91


 

The
assumptions used for each of the last three fiscal years and the resulting estimate of weighted-average fair value per share of options granted during those years are as follows: 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Expected life of stock options
 
 
3.5-4 years
 
 
4 years
 
 
4 years
 


Expected life of stock purchases
 
 
6 months
 
 
6 months
 
 
6 months
 


Interest rate—stock options
 
 
2.14%-2.45
%
 
2.90
%
 
4.90
%


Interest rate—stock purchases
 
 
1.10%-1.77
%
 
2.71
%
 
5.97
%


Volatility—stock options
 
 
40%-63
%
 
64
%
 
66
%


Volatility—stock purchases
 
 
35%-44
%
 
51
%
 
90
%


Dividend yields
 
 
0
 
 
0
 
 
0
 



Weighted-average fair value of options granted during the year
 
$

6.63
 
$

10.11
 
$

10.15
 


Weighted-average fair value of stock purchases during the year
 
$
4.24
 
$
6.73
 
$
11.15
 



For
purposes of the pro forma disclosures provided pursuant to SFAS No. 123, the expected volatility assumptions used by the Company prior to the third quarter of 2003 have been based solely on
the historical volatility of the Company's common stock over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected life of the Company's stock options. Beginning in the third quarter of
2003, the Company has modified this approach to consider other relevant factors including implied volatility in market traded options on the Company's common stock and the impact of unusual
fluctuations not reasonably expected to recur on the historical volatility of the Company's common stock. The Company will continue to monitor these and other relevant factors in developing the
expected volatility assumption used to value future awards. 
Beginning
in the third quarter of 2003, the Company shortened its estimate of the expected life of new options granted to its employees from 4 years to 3.5 years. The Company bases its
expected life assumption on its historical experience and on the terms and conditions of the stock options it grants to employees. The change in the expected life assumption made during the third
quarter of 2003 was the result of the expected impact of shortening the contractual life of new options granted to employees from 10 years to 7 years and changing the vesting provisions
of new options granted to employees from 4 year straight-line annual vesting to 4 year straight-line quarterly vesting. 
Note 10—Commitments and Contingencies  
Lease Commitments  
The Company leases various equipment and facilities, including retail space, under noncancelable operating lease arrangements. The Company does not currently utilize any other
off-balance-sheet financing arrangements. The major facility leases are for terms of 5 to 10 years and generally provide renewal options for terms of 3 to 5 additional years. Leases
for retail space are for terms of 5 to 15 years and often contain multi-year renewal options. As of September 27, 2003, the Company's total future minimum lease payments
under noncancelable operating leases were $600 million, of which $354 million related to leases for retail space. 
Rent
expense under all operating leases, including both cancelable and noncancelable leases, was $97 million, $92 million, and $80 million in 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively.
Future minimum lease 
92


 

payments
under noncancelable operating leases having remaining terms in excess of one year as of September 27, 2003, are as follows (in millions): 



Fiscal Years 
 
 


2004
 
$
100


2005
 
 
100


2006
 
 
83


2007
 
 
64


2008
 
 
51


Later years
 
 
202


 
 



Total minimum lease payments
 
$
600


 
 




Accrued Warranty and Indemnifications  
The Company offers a basic limited parts and labor warranty on its hardware products. The basic warranty period for hardware products is typically one year from the date of
purchase by the end-user. The Company also offers a 90-day basic warranty for Apple software and for Apple service parts used to repair Apple hardware products. The Company
provides currently for the estimated cost that may be incurred under its basic limited product warranties at the time related revenue is recognized. Factors considered in determining appropriate
accruals for product warranty obligations include the size of the installed base of products subject to warranty protection, historical warranty claim rates, historical and projected
cost-per-claim, and knowledge of specific product failures that are outside of the Company's typical experience. The Company assesses the adequacy of its preexisting warranty
liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary based on actual experience and changes in future expectations. 
The
following table reconciles changes in the Company's accrued warranties and related costs (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Beginning accrued warranty and related costs
 
$
69
 
$
87
 
$
108
 


Cost of warranty claims
 
 
(71
)
 
(79
)
 
(92
)


Accruals for product warranties
 
 
69
 
 
61
 
 
71
 


 
 

 

 

 


Ending accrued warranty and related costs
 
$
67
 
$
69
 
$
87
 


 
 

 

 

 



The
Company generally does not indemnify end-users of its operating system and application software against legal claims that the software infringes third-party intellectual property
rights. Other licensing agreements entered into by the Company sometimes include indemnification provisions under which the Company could be subject to costs and/or damages in the event of an
infringement claim against the Company or an indemnified third-party. However, the Company has not been required to make any significant payments resulting from such an infringement claim asserted
against itself or an indemnified third-party and, in the opinion of management, does not have a potential liability related to unresolved infringement claims that would have a material adverse effect
on its financial condition, liquidity or results of operations. Therefore, the Company did not record a liability for infringement costs as of either September 27, 2003 or September 28,
2002. 
93




  
Concentrations in the Available Sources of Supply of Materials and Product  
Although certain components essential to the Company's business are generally available from multiple sources, other key components (including microprocessors and
application-specific integrated circuits, or ("ASICs")) are currently obtained by the Company from single or limited sources. Some other key components, while currently available to the Company from
multiple sources, are at times subject to industry-wide availability and pricing pressures. In addition, the Company uses some components that are not common to the rest of the personal
computer industry, and new products introduced by the Company often initially utilize custom components obtained from only one source until the Company has evaluated whether there is a need for and
subsequently qualifies additional suppliers. If the supply of a key single-sourced component to the Company were to be delayed or curtailed or in the event a key manufacturing vendor delays shipments
of completed products to the Company, the Company's ability to ship related products in desired quantities and in a timely manner could be adversely affected. The Company's business and financial
performance could also be adversely affected depending on the time required to obtain sufficient quantities from the original source, or to identify and obtain sufficient quantities from an
alternative source. Continued availability of these components may be affected if producers were to decide to concentrate on the production of common components instead of components customized to
meet the Company's requirements. Finally, significant portions of the Company's CPUs, logic boards, and assembled products are now manufactured by outsourcing partners, the majority of which occurs in
various parts of Asia. Although the Company works closely with its outsourcing partners on manufacturing schedules, the Company's operating results could be adversely affected if its outsourcing
partners were unable to meet their production obligations. 
Contingencies  
Beginning on September 27, 2001, three shareholder class action lawsuits were filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California against
the Company and its Chief Executive Officer. These lawsuits are substantially identical, and purport to bring suit on behalf of persons who purchased the Company's publicly traded common stock between
July 19, 2000, and September 28, 2000. The complaints allege violations of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act and seek unspecified compensatory damages and other relief. The Company
believes these claims are without merit and intends to defend them vigorously. The Company filed a motion to dismiss on June 4, 2002, which was heard by the Court on September 13, 2002.
On December 11, 2002, the Court granted the Company's
motion to dismiss for failure to state a cause of action, with leave to Plaintiffs to amend their complaint within thirty days. Plaintiffs filed their amended complaint on January 31, 2003, and
on March 17, 2003, the Company filed a motion to dismiss the amended complaint. The Court heard the Company's motion on July 11, 2003 and dismissed Plaintiff's claims with prejudice on
August 12, 2003. Plaintiffs have appealed the ruling. 
The
Company is subject to certain other legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary course of business and have not been fully adjudicated. In the opinion of management, the Company
does not have a potential liability related to any current legal proceedings and claims that would individually or in the aggregate have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, liquidity
or results of operations. However, the results of legal proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty. Should the Company fail to prevail in any of these legal matters or should several of these
legal matters be resolved against the Company in the same reporting period, the operating results of a particular reporting period could be materially adversely affected. 
Production
and marketing of products in certain states and countries may subject the Company to environmental and other regulations including, in some instances, the requirement to provide customers 
94


 

the
ability to return product at the end of its useful life, and place responsibility for environmentally safe disposal or recycling with the Company. Such laws and regulations have recently been
passed in several jurisdictions that the Company operates including various European Union member countries, Japan and California. Although the Company does not anticipate any material adverse affects
in the future based on the nature of its operations and the thrust of such laws, there is no assurance that such existing laws or future laws will not have a material adverse effect on the Company's
results of operations and financial position. 
Note 11—Segment Information and Geographic Data  
The
Company manages its business primarily on a geographic basis. The Company's reportable segments are comprised of the Americas, Europe, Japan, and Retail. The Americas segment includes both North
and South America, except for the activities of the Company's Retail segment. The Europe segment includes European countries as well as the Middle East and Africa. The Japan segment includes only
Japan. As of September 27, 2003, the Retail segment currently operates Apple-owned retail stores in the United States. Other operating segments include Asia-Pacific, which includes
Australia and Asia except for Japan, and the Company's subsidiary, Filemaker, Inc. Each reportable operating segment provides similar hardware and software products and similar services, and
the accounting policies of the various segments are the same as those described in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Note 1, except as described below for the Retail segment. 
The
Company evaluates the performance of its operating segments based on net sales. The Retail segment's performance is also evaluated based on operating income. Net sales for geographic segments are
based on the location of the customers. Operating income for each segment includes net sales to third parties, related cost of sales, and operating expenses directly attributable to the segment.
Operating income for each segment excludes other income and expense and certain expenses that are managed outside the operating segments. Costs excluded from segment operating income include various
corporate expenses, manufacturing costs not included in standard costs, income taxes, and various nonrecurring charges. Corporate expenses include research and development, corporate marketing
expenses, and other separately managed general and administrative expenses including certain corporate expenses associated with support of the Retail segment. The Company does not include intercompany
transfers between segments for management reporting purposes. Segment assets exclude corporate assets. Corporate assets include cash, short-term and long-term investments,
manufacturing facilities, miscellaneous corporate infrastructure, goodwill and other acquired intangible assets, and retail store construction-in-progress that is not subject
to depreciation. Except for the Retail segment, capital expenditures for long-lived assets are not reported to management by segment. Capital expenditures by the Retail segment were
$92 million, $106 million, and $92 million in 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. 
Operating
income for all segments except Retail includes cost of sales at standard cost. Certain manufacturing expenses and related adjustments not included in segment cost of sales, including
variances between standard and actual manufacturing costs and the mark-up above standard cost for product supplied to the Retail segment, are included in corporate expenses. 
To
assess the operating performance of the Retail segment several significant items are included in its results for internal management reporting that are not included in results of the Company's
other segments. First, cost of sales for the Retail segment includes a mark-up above the Company's standard cost to approximate the price normally charged to the Company's major channel
partners in the United States. For the years ended September 27, 2003, September 28, 2002, and September 29, 2001 this resulted in the 
95


 

recognition
of additional cost of sales above standard cost by the Retail segment and an offsetting benefit to corporate expenses of approximately $106 million, $52 million, and
$4 million, respectively. 
Second,
the Retail segment includes in its net sales proceeds from sales of the Company's extended warranty and support contracts and also recognizes related cost of sales based on the amount at which
such contracts are normally sold to the Company's resellers operating retail stores in the United States. This treatment is consistent with how the Company's major resellers account for the sales and
cost of the Company's extended warranty and support contracts. Because the Company has not yet earned the revenue or incurred the costs associated with the sale of these contracts, an offset to these
amounts is recognized in the Americas segment's net sales and cost of sales. For the year ended September 27, 2003, this resulted in the recognition of net sales and cost of sales by the Retail
segment, with
corresponding offsets in the Americas segment, of $30 million and $20 million, respectively. For the year ended September 28, 2002, this resulted in the recognition of net sales
and cost of sales by the Retail segment, with corresponding offsets in the Americas segment, of $8 million and $6 million, respectively. These amounts were insignificant in fiscal 2001. 
Third,
a portion of the operating expenses associated with certain high profile retail stores are allocated from the Retail segment to corporate marketing expense. Allocation of these expenses
reflects the unique nature of these stores which, given their larger size and extraordinary design elements, function as vehicles for general corporate marketing, corporate sales and marketing events,
and brand awareness. Allocated operating costs are those in excess of operating costs incurred by one of the Company's more typical retail locations. Stores were open in three such high profile
locations in New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago as of September 27, 2003. Expenses allocated to corporate marketing resulting from the operations of these three stores were $6 million
and $1 million in fiscal 2003 and 2002, respectively. 
96


 

Summary
information by operating segment follows (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Americas:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Net sales
 
$
3,181
 
$
3,131
 
$
3,037
 


 
Operating income
 
$
323
 
$
278
 
$
128
 


 
Depreciation, amortization and accretion
 
$
5
 
$
4
 
$
4
 


 
Segment assets(a)
 
$
494
 
$
395
 
$
334
 



Europe:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Net sales
 
$
1,309
 
$
1,251
 
$
1,249
 


 
Operating income
 
$
130
 
$
122
 
$
68
 


 
Depreciation and amortization
 
$
4
 
$
4
 
$
6
 


 
Segment assets
 
$
252
 
$
165
 
$
137
 



Japan:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Net sales
 
$
698
 
$
710
 
$
713
 


 
Operating income
 
$
121
 
$
140
 
$
98
 


 
Depreciation, amortization and accretion
 
$
3
 
$
2
 
$
2
 


 
Segment assets
 
$
130
 
$
50
 
$
44
 



Retail:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Net sales
 
$
621
 
$
283
 
$
19
 


 
Operating loss
 
$
(5
)
$
(22
)
$
(21
)


 
Depreciation, amortization and accretion(b)
 
$
25
 
$
16
 
$
2
 


 
Segment assets(b)
 
$
243
 
$
141
 
$
46
 



Other Segments(c):
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
Net sales
 
$
398
 
$
367
 
$
345
 


 
Operating income
 
$
51
 
$
44
 
$
24
 


 
Depreciation, amortization and accretion
 
$
2
 
$
2
 
$
2
 


 
Segment assets
 
$
78
 
$
67
 
$
70
 






(a)The
Americas asset figures do not include fixed assets held in the United States. Such fixed assets are not allocated specifically to the Americas segment and are included in the
corporate assets figures below.
(b)Retail
segment depreciation and asset figures reflect the cost and related depreciation of its retail stores and related infrastructure. Retail store
construction-in-progress, which is not subject to depreciation, is reflected in corporate assets.
(c)Other
Segments consists of Asia-Pacific and FileMaker. Certain amounts in prior fiscal periods related to recent acquisitions and Internet services have been reclassified
from Other Segments to the Americas segment to conform to the 2003 presentation. 

97


 




A
reconciliation of the Company's segment operating income and assets to the consolidated financial statements follows (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001
 


Segment operating income
 
$
620
 
$
562
 
$
297
 


Corporate expenses, net
 
 
(595
)
 
(514
)
 
(630
)


Purchased in-process research and development
 
 
—
 
 
(1
)
 
(11
)


Restructuring costs
 
 
(26
)
 
(30
)
 
—
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
Consolidated operating income (loss)
 
$
(1
)
$
17
 
$
(344
)


 
 

 

 

 



Segment assets
 
$

1,197
 
$

818
 
$

631
 


Corporate assets
 
$
5,618
 
$
5,480
 
$
5,390
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
Consolidated assets
 
$
6,815
 
$
6,298
 
$
6,021
 


 
 

 

 

 



Segment depreciation, amortization and accretion
 
$

39
 
$

28
 
$

16
 


Corporate depreciation, amortization and accretion
 
 
74
 
 
86
 
 
84
 


 
 

 

 

 


 
Consolidated depreciation, amortization and accretion
 
$
113
 
$
114
 
$
100
 


 
 

 

 

 



A
large portion of the Company's net sales is derived from its international operations. Also, a majority of the raw materials used in the Company's products is obtained from sources outside of the
United States, and a majority of the products sold by the Company is assembled internationally in the Company's facility in Cork, Ireland or by third-party vendors in Taiwan, Korea, the Netherlands,
the People's Republic of China, and the Czech Republic. As a result, the Company is subject to risks associated with foreign operations, such as obtaining governmental permits and approvals, currency
exchange fluctuations, currency restrictions, political instability, labor problems, trade restrictions, and changes in tariff and freight charges. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of
net sales in 2003, 2002 or 2001. 
Net
sales and long-lived assets related to operations in the United States, Japan, and other foreign countries are as follows (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001


Net Sales:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


United States
 
$
3,627
 
$
3,272
 
$
2,936


Japan
 
 
698
 
 
710
 
 
713


Other Foreign Countries
 
 
1,882
 
 
1,760
 
 
1,714


 
 

 

 



 
Total Net Sales
 
$
6,207
 
$
5,742
 
$
5,363


 
 

 

 




Long-Lived Assets:
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 


United States
 
$
635
 
$
561
 
$
498


Japan
 
 
19
 
 
2
 
 
3


Other Foreign Countries
 
 
60
 
 
69
 
 
77


 
 

 

 



 
Total Long-Lived Assets
 
$
714
 
$
632
 
$
578


 
 

 

 




98


 
Information
regarding net sales by product is as follows (in millions): 



 
 
2003
 
2002
 
2001


Net Sales:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Power Macintosh(a)
 
$
1,237
 
$
1,380
 
$
1,664


PowerBook
 
 
1,299
 
 
831
 
 
813


iMac
 
 
1,238
 
 
1,448
 
 
1,117


iBook
 
 
717
 
 
875
 
 
809


 
 

 

 



 
Total Macintosh Net Sales
 
$
4,491
 
$
4,534
 
$
4,403


 
 

 

 



Peripherals and other hardware(b)
 
 
1,058
 
 
674
 
 
387


Software(c)
 
 
362
 
 
307
 
 
230


Service and other Net Sales
 
 
296
 
 
227
 
 
343


 
 

 

 



 
Total Net Sales
 
$
6,207
 
$
5,742
 
$
5,363


 
 

 

 







(a)Power
Macintosh figures include server sales.
(b)Net
sales of peripherals and other hardware include sales of iPod, Apple-branded and third-party displays, and other hardware accessories.
(c)Net
sales of software include sales of Apple-branded operating system and application software and sales of third-party software. 

Note 12—Related Party Transactions and Certain Other Transactions  
During
the first quarter of 2000, the Company's Board of Directors approved a special executive bonus for the Company's Chief Executive Officer for past services in the form of an aircraft with a
total cost to the Company of approximately $90 million, the majority of which was not tax deductible. Approximately half of the total charge was for the cost of the aircraft. The other half
represented all other costs and taxes associated with the bonus. In the fourth quarter of 2002, all significant work and payments associated with the aircraft were completed. Of the original
$90 million accrual, $2.4 million remained unspent at the end of fiscal 2002 and was reversed. 
In
March 2002, the Company entered into a Reimbursement Agreement with its Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Steven P. Jobs, for the reimbursement of expenses incurred by Mr. Jobs in
the operation of his private plane when used for Apple business. The Reimbursement Agreement is effective for expenses incurred by Mr. Jobs for Apple business purposes since he took delivery of
the plane in May 2001. The Company recognized a total of $404,000 in expenses pursuant to the Reimbursement Agreement during fiscal 2003. For fiscal 2002, the Company recognized a total of
$1,168,000 in expenses pursuant to the Reimbursement Agreement related to expenses incurred by Mr. Jobs during 2001 and 2002. All expenses recognized pursuant to the Reimbursement Agreement
have been included by the Company in selling, general, and administrative expenses. 
In
connection with a relocation assistance package, the Company loaned Mr. Ronald B. Johnson, Senior Vice President, Retail, $1.5 million for the purchase of his principal residence. The
loan is secured by a deed of trust and is due and payable in May 2004. Under the terms of the loan, Mr. Johnson agreed that should he exercise any of his stock options prior to the due
date of the loan, he would pay the Company an amount equal to the lesser of (1) an amount equal to 50% of the total net gain realized from the exercise 
99


 

of
the options; or (2) $375,000 multiplied by the number of years between the exercise date and the date of the loan. Mr. Johnson repaid $750,000 of this loan in fiscal 2003. The
remaining $750,000 is due and payable in May 2004. 
Mr. Jerome
York, a member of the Board of Directors of the Company, is a member of an investment group that purchased MicroWarehouse, Inc. (MicroWarehouse) in January 2000. Until
September 7, 2003, he also served as its Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer. MicroWarehouse is a reseller of computer hardware, software and peripheral products, including products
made by the Company. On September 8, 2003, CDW Corporation (CDW), acquired selected North American assets of MicroWarehouse. MicroWarehouse subsequently filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection in the
United States. MicroWarehouse accounted for 2.4%, 3.3%, and 2.9% of the Company's net sales in fiscal 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively. Trade receivables from MicroWarehouse were $9.9 million
and $20.9 million as of September 27, 2003, and September 28, 2002, respectively. The Company has provided what it believes to be an adequate allowance on the outstanding
receivable based on the Company's secured interest position in selected MicroWarehouse assets and the expected payments to unsecured creditors. Sales to MicroWarehouse and related trade receivables
were generally subject to the same terms and conditions as those with the Company's other resellers. In addition, the Company purchases miscellaneous equipment and supplies from MicroWarehouse. Total
purchases amounted to approximately $2.3 million, $2.9 million, and $3.4 million in fiscal 2003, 2002, and 2001, respectively. 
Note 13—Selected Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited)  



 
 
Fourth Quarter
 
Third Quarter
 
Second Quarter
 
First Quarter
 


 
 
(Tabular amounts in millions, except per share amounts) 
 


2003
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Net sales
 
$
1,715
 
$
1,545
 
$
1,475
 
$
1,472
 


Gross margin
 
$
456
 
$
428
 
$
418
 
$
406
 


Net income (loss)
 
$
44
 
$
19
 
$
14
 
$
(8
)


Earnings (loss) per common share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Basic
 
$
0.12
 
$
0.05
 
$
0.04
 
$
(0.02
)


 
Diluted
 
$
0.12
 
$
0.05
 
$
0.04
 
$
(0.02
)


2002
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


Net sales
 
$
1,443
 
$
1,429
 
$
1,495
 
$
1,375
 


Gross margin
 
$
381
 
$
391
 
$
409
 
$
422
 


Net income (loss)
 
$
(45
)
$
32
 
$
40
 
$
38
 


Earnings (loss) per common share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
Basic
 
$
(0.13
)
$
0.09
 
$
0.11
 
$
0.11
 


 
Diluted
 
$
(0.13
)
$
0.09
 
$
0.11
 
$
0.11
 



Basic
and diluted earnings (loss) per share are computed independently for each of the quarters presented. Therefore, the sum of quarterly basic and diluted per share information may not equal annual
basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share. 
Net
income during the fourth and third quarters of 2003 included after-tax net gains related to non-current investments of $5 million and $1 million,
respectively. Net income for the fourth quarter also included settlement of the Company's forward purchase agreement resulting in a gain of $6 million and a favorable cumulative-effect type
adjustment related to the adoption of SFAS 150 of $3 million. Net income (loss) 
100


 

during
the second and first quarters of 2003 included restructuring charges, net of tax, of $2 million and $18 million, respectively. Net loss for the first quarter of 2003 included an
after-tax unfavorable cumulative-effect type adjustment for the adoption of SFAS No.143 of $2 million. 
Net
loss for the fourth quarter of 2002 included the following items, net of tax: the write-down of certain equity investments totaling $49 million; a restructuring charge of
$4 million; an in-process research and development charge of approximately $1 million; and the reversal of a portion of a previous executive compensation expense resulting in
a favorable impact of $2 million. Net income for the first quarter of 2002 included a restructuring charge, net of tax, of $18 million. Net income during the first quarter of 2002 also
included gains, net of tax, of $17 million related to non-current investments. 
101




  

 
 
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT AUDITORS     
The
Board of Directors and Shareholders
Apple Computer, Inc.: 
We
have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Apple Computer, Inc. and subsidiaries as of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002, and the related consolidated
statements of operations, shareholders' equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended September 27, 2003. These consolidated financial statements are
the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits. 
We
conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion. 
In
our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Apple Computer, Inc. and subsidiaries as of
September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended September 27,
2003, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. 
As
discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed its method of accounting for asset retirement obligations and for financial instruments with characteristics
of both liabilities and equity in 2003, changed its method of accounting for goodwill in 2002, and changed its method of accounting for hedging activities in 2001. 



 
 
/s/  KPMG LLP      



Mountain
View, California
October 14, 2003 
102



  

 
 
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure     
Not
applicable. 
 
 
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures     
Based
on an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of the Company's management, the Company's principal executive officer and principal financial officer have concluded that the
Company's disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-14(c) and 15d-14(c) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(Exchange Act)) were effective as of September 27, 2003 to ensure that information required to be disclosed by the Company in reports that it
files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in Securities and Exchange Commission rules and forms. 
There
were no significant changes in the Company's internal control over financial reporting identified in management's evaluation during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2003 that have materially
affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect the Company's internal control over financial reporting. 
103


 
 
 
PART III     
 
  Item 10. Directors and Executive Officers of the Registrant     
Directors  
Listed below are the Company's six directors whose terms expire at the next annual meeting of shareholders. 



Name 
 
Position With the Company 
 
Age
 
Director Since


William V. Campbell
 
Director
 
63
 
1997


Millard S. Drexler
 
Director
 
59
 
1999


Albert Gore, Jr.
 
Director
 
56
 
2003


Steven P. Jobs
 
Director and Chief Executive Officer
 
48
 
1997


Arthur D. Levinson
 
Director
 
53
 
2000


Jerome B. York
 
Director
 
65
 
1997



William V. Campbell has been Chairman of the Board of Directors of Intuit, Inc. ("Intuit") since
August 1998. From September 1999 to January 2000, Mr. Campbell acted as Chief Executive Officer of Intuit. From April 1994 to August 1998, Mr. Campbell
was President and Chief Executive Officer and a director of Intuit. From January 1991 to December 1993, Mr. Campbell was President and Chief Executive Officer of GO Corporation.
Mr. Campbell also serves on the board of directors of Opsware, Inc. 
Albert Gore, Jr. has served as a Senior Advisor to Google, Inc. and Vice Chairman of Metropolitan West Financial LLC since 2001. He is a visiting
professor at the University of California Los Angeles, Fisk University and Middle Tennessee State University. Mr. Gore was inaugurated as the 45th Vice President of the United States in 1993.
He was re-elected in 1996 and served for a total of eight years as President of the Senate, a member of the cabinet and the National Security Council, and as the leader of a wide range of
Administration initiatives including environmental policy, technology, science, communications and government cost reduction. 
Millard S. Drexler has been Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of J. Crew Group, Inc. since March 2003. Previously, Mr. Drexler
was Chief Executive Officer of Gap Inc. from 1995 and President from 1987 until September 2002. Mr. Drexler was also a member of the Board of Directors of Gap Inc. from
November 1983 until October 2002. 
Steven P. Jobs is one of the Company's co-founders and currently serves as its Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Jobs is also the Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer of Pixar Animation Studios. In addition, Mr. Jobs co-founded NeXT Software, Inc. ("NeXT") and
served as the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of NeXT from 1985 until 1997 when NeXT was acquired by the Company. 
Arthur D. Levinson, Ph.D. has been President, Chief Executive Officer and a director of Genentech Inc.
("Genentech") since July 1995. Dr. Levinson has been Chairman of the Board of Directors of Genentech since September 1999. He
joined Genentech in 1980 and served in a number of executive positions, including Senior Vice President of R&D from 1993 to 1995. 
Jerome B. York has been Chief Executive Officer of Harwinton Capital Corporation, a private investment company which he controls, since
September 2003. From January 2000 until September 2003, Mr. York was Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of MicroWarehouse, Inc., a reseller of computer hardware,
software and peripheral products. From September 1995 to October 1999, he was Vice Chairman of Tracinda Corporation. From May 1993 to September 1995 he was Senior Vice
President and Chief Financial Officer of IBM Corporation, and served as a member of IBM's Board of Directors from January 1995 to August 1995. Previously his career was in the automotive
industry, with his last position being Executive Vice President-Finance and Chief Financial Officer and a member of the Board of Directors of Chrysler Corporation. Mr. York is also a director
of Tyco International Ltd. and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc. 
104


 

Role of the Board; Corporate Governance Matters  
It is the paramount duty of the Board of Directors to oversee the Chief Executive Officer and other senior management in the competent and ethical operation of the Company on a
day-to-day basis and to assure that the long-term interests of the shareholders are being served. To satisfy this duty, the directors take a proactive, focused
approach to their position, and set standards to ensure that the Company is committed to business success through maintenance of the highest standards of responsibility and ethics. 
Members
of the Board bring to the Company a wide range of experience, knowledge and judgment. These varied skills mean that good governance depends on far more than a "check the box" approach to
standards or procedures. The governance structure in the Company is designed to be a working structure for principled actions, effective decision-making and appropriate monitoring of both compliance
and performance. The key practices and procedures of the Board are outlined in the Corporate Governance Guidelines available on the Company's website at www.apple.com/investor. 
Board Committees  
The Board has a standing Compensation Committee, a Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee ("Nominating Committee") and an
Audit and Finance Committee ("Audit Committee"). 
The
Compensation Committee is primarily responsible for reviewing the compensation arrangements for the Company's executive officers, including the Chief Executive Officer, and for administering the
Company's stock option plans. Members of the Compensation Committee are Messrs. Campbell, Drexler, Gore and Dr. Levinson. 
The
Nominating Committee assists the Board in identifying qualified individuals to become directors, determines the composition of the Board and its committees, monitors the process to assess Board
effectiveness and helps develop and implement the Company's corporate governance guidelines. Members of the Nominating Committee are Messrs. Campbell, Drexler, Gore and Dr. Levinson. 
The
Audit Committee is primarily responsible for overseeing the services performed by the Company's independent auditors and internal audit department, evaluating the Company's accounting policies and
its system of internal controls and reviewing significant financial transactions. Consistent with the Nasdaq audit committee structure and membership requirements, the Audit Committee is comprised of
three members: Messrs. Campbell, York and Dr. Levinson. Because of Mr. York's affiliation with MicroWarehouse, (see Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions), he is
deemed to be a "non-independent" director. As permitted under the Nasdaq requirements, the Board carefully considered Mr. York's affiliation with MicroWarehouse as well as his
accounting and financial expertise and determined that it is in the best interest of the Company and its shareholders that he continue to serve as a member of the Audit Committee. Both
Mr. Campbell and Dr. Levinson are independent directors. 
The
Audit, Compensation and Nominating Committees operate under written charters adopted by the Board. These charters are available on the Company's website at www.apple.com/investor. 
Audit Committee Financial Expert  
While more than one member of the Company's Audit Committee qualifies as an "audit committee financial expert" under Item 401(h) of Regulation S-K,
Mr. William V. Campbell, the Committee chairperson, is the designated audit committee financial expert. Mr. Campbell is considered "independent" as the term is used in Item
7(d)(3)(iv) of Schedule 14A under the Exchange Act. 
Code of Ethics  
The Company has a code of ethics that applies to all of the Company's employees, including its principal executive officer, principal financial officer and principal accounting
officer. A copy of this code, "Ethics: The Way We Do Business Worldwide" is available on the Company's website at www.apple.com/investor and is
filed as an exhibit to this annual report on Form 10-K. The Company intends to disclose any 
105


 
changes
in or waivers from its code of ethics by posting such information on its website or by filing a Form 8-K. 
Executive Officers  
The following sets forth certain information regarding executive officers of the Company. Information pertaining to Mr. Jobs, who is both a director and an executive
officer of the Company, may be found in the section entitled "Directors." 
Fred D. Anderson, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (age 59), joined the Company in April 1996. Prior to joining the Company,
Mr. Anderson was Corporate Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Automatic Data Processing, Inc., a position he held from August 1992 to March 1996.
Mr. Anderson also serves as a director of eBay Inc. and E.piphany, Inc. 
Timothy D. Cook, Executive Vice President, Worldwide Sales and Operations (age 43), joined the Company in February 1998. Prior to joining the
Company, Mr. Cook held the position of Vice President, Corporate Materials for Compaq Computer Corporation ("Compaq"). Previous to his work at
Compaq, Mr. Cook was the Chief Operating Officer of the Reseller Division at Intelligent Electronics. Mr. Cook also spent 12 years with IBM, most recently as Director of North
American Fulfillment. 
Nancy R. Heinen, Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary (age 47), joined the Company in September 1997. Prior to joining the
Company, Ms. Heinen held the position of Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary of the Board of Directors at NeXT from February 1994 until the acquisition of NeXT by the Company
in February 1997. 
Ronald B. Johnson, Senior Vice President, Retail (age 45), joined the Company in January 2000. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Johnson
spent 16 years with Target Stores, most recently as Senior Merchandising Executive. 
Peter Oppenheimer, Senior Vice President of Finance and Corporate Controller (age 41), joined the Company in July 1996. Mr. Oppenheimer
also served with the Company in the position of Vice President and Corporate Controller and as Senior Director of Finance for the Americas. Prior to joining the Company, Mr. Oppenheimer was CFO
of one of the four business units for Automatic Data Processing, Inc. ("ADP"). Prior to joining ADP, Mr. Oppenheimer spent six years in the
Information Technology Consulting Practice with Coopers and Lybrand. 
Jonathan Rubinstein, Senior Vice President, Hardware Engineering (age 47), joined the Company in February 1997. Before joining the Company,
Mr. Rubinstein was Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of FirePower Systems Incorporated, from May 1993 to August 1996. Mr. Rubinstein also serves as a
member of the Board of Directors of Immersion Corporation. 
Philip W. Schiller, Senior Vice President, Worldwide Product Marketing (age 43), rejoined the Company in 1997. Prior to rejoining the Company,
Mr. Schiller was Vice President of Product Marketing at Macromedia, Inc. from December 1995 to March 1997 and was Director of Product Marketing at FirePower
Systems, Inc. from 1993 to December 1995. Prior to that, Mr. Schiller spent six years at the Company in various marketing positions. 
Bertrand Serlet, Ph.D., Senior Vice President, Software Engineering (age 42), joined the Company in February 1997 upon the Company's acquisition
of NeXT. At NeXT, Dr. Serlet held several engineering and managerial positions, including Director of Web Engineering. Prior to NeXT, from 1985 to 1989, Dr. Serlet worked as a research
engineer at Xerox PARC. 
Sina Tamaddon, Senior Vice President, Applications (age 46), joined the Company in September 1997. Mr. Tamaddon has also served with the
Company in the position of Senior Vice President Worldwide Service and Support, and Vice President and General Manager, Newton Group. Before joining the Company, Mr. Tamaddon held the position
of Vice President, Europe with NeXT from September 1996 
106


 

through
March 1997. From August 1994 to August 1996, Mr. Tamaddon held the position of Vice President, Professional Services with NeXT. 
Avadis Tevanian, Jr., Ph.D., Senior Vice President, Chief Software Technology Officer (age 42), joined the Company in February 1997 upon the
Company's acquisition of NeXT. Dr. Tevanian served with the Company in the position of Senior Vice President, Software Engineering from 1997 to July 2003. With NeXT, Dr. Tevanian
held several positions, including Vice President, Engineering, from April 1995 to February 1997. Prior to April 1995, Dr. Tevanian worked as an engineer with NeXT and held
several management positions. 
 
 
Item 11. Executive Compensation     
Information Regarding Executive Compensation  
The following table summarizes compensation information for the last three fiscal years for (i) Mr. Jobs, Chief Executive Officer and (ii) the four most
highly compensated executive officers other than the Chief Executive Officer who were serving as executive officers of the Company at the end of the fiscal year (collectively, the
"Named Executive Officers"). 
 
 
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE     



 
 
 
 
Annual Compensation
 
Long-Term
Compensation
 
 
 


Name and Principal Position 
 
Fiscal Year
 
Salary
($)
 
Bonus
($)
 
Restricted
Stock Award
($)
 
Securities Underlying Options*
(#)
 
All Other Compensation
($)
 


Steven P. Jobs
Chief Executive Officer
 
2003
2002
2001
 
1
1
1
 
—
2,268,698
43,511,534
(2)(2)
74,750,000
(1)
—
7,500,000
—
(1)
—
1,302,795
40,484,594
(2)(2)



Fred D. Anderson
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
 

2003
2002
2001
 

656,631
656,631
657,039
 

—
—
—
 

—
—
—
 

—
—
1,000,000
 

11,450
11,000
7,312
(3)(3)(3)



Timothy D. Cook
Executive Vice President, Worldwide Sales and Operations
 

2003
2002
2001
 

617,673
563,829
452,219
 

—
—
500,000
 

—
—
—
 

—
—
1,000,000
 

9,929
8,025
7,875
(3)(3)(3)



Ronald B. Johnson
Senior Vice President, Retail
 

2003
2002
2001
 

452,404
452,404
452,429
 

1,500,000
—
—
 

—
—
—
 

—
300,000
300,000
 

—
—
—
 



Avadis Tevanian, Jr. Ph.D
Senior Vice President, Chief Software Technology Officer
 

2003
2002
2001
 

456,731
492,212
460,873
 

—
—
500
 

—
—
—
 

—
—
1,000,000
 

11,962
10,700
10,200
(3)(3)(3)





(1)In
March 2003, Mr. Jobs voluntarily cancelled all of his outstanding options, excluding those granted to him in his capacity as a director. In March 2003, the
Board awarded Mr. Jobs five million restricted shares of the Company's Common Stock which generally vest in full on the third anniversary of the grant date.
(2)In
December 1999, Mr. Jobs was given a special executive bonus for past services as the Company's interim Chief Executive Officer, in the form of an aircraft with a
total cost to the Company of approximately $90,000,000. Because the aircraft was transferred to Mr. Jobs in 2001, the amount of approximately $43.5 million paid by the Company during
fiscal year 2001 towards the purchase of the plane and the related tax assistance of approximately $40.5 million was reported as income to Mr. Jobs. In fiscal 2002, approximately
$2.27 million paid by the Company towards the purchase of the plane and approximately $1.3 million in related tax assistance was reported as income to Mr. Jobs.
(3)Consists
of matching contributions made by the Company in accordance with the terms of the 401(k) plan. 
107



  

Option Grants in Last Fiscal Year  
There were no options granted to the Named Executive Officers during fiscal year 2003. 
Options Exercised and Year-End Option Holdings  
The following table provides information about stock option exercises by the Named Executive Officers during fiscal year 2003 and stock options held by each of them at fiscal
year-end. 
 
 
AGGREGATED OPTION EXERCISES IN THE LAST FISCAL YEAR  AND FISCAL YEAR-END OPTION VALUES     



 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of Securities Underlying Unexercised Options at Fiscal
Year-End (#)
 
Value of Unexercised
In-the-Money Options at Fiscal Year-End ($)(1)


Name 
 
Shares
Acquired
on Exercise (#)
 
Value
Realized
($)


 
Exercisable
 
Unexercisable
 
Exercisable
 
Unexercisable


Steven P. Jobs
 
—
 
—
 
60,000
(2)
—
 
$
551,400
 
 
—


Fred D. Anderson
 
—
 
—
 
1,150,000
 
800,000
 
$
4,134,125
 
$
2,952,000


Timothy D. Cook
 
—
 
—
 
800,000
 
800,000
 
$
2,952,000
 
$
2,952,000


Ronald B. Johnson
 
—
 
—
 
1,181,250
 
618,750
 
$
451,687
 
$
205,312


Avadis Tevanian, Jr.
 
—
 
—
 
1,600,000
 
800,000
 
$
9,636,522
 
$
2,952,000





(1)Market
value of securities underlying in-the-money options at the end of fiscal year 2003 (based on $20.69 per share, the closing price of Common Stock on the
Nasdaq National Market on September 27, 2003), minus the exercise price.
(2)Includes
60,000 options granted to Mr. Jobs in his capacity as a director pursuant to the 1997 Director Stock Option Plan. In March 2003, Mr. Jobs voluntarily
cancelled all of his outstanding options, excluding those granted to him in his capacity as a director. 

Director Compensation  
The form and amount of director compensation is determined by the Board after a review of recommendations made by the Nominating Committee. The current practice of the Board is
that a substantial portion of a director's annual retainer be equity-based. In 1998, shareholders approved the 1997 Director Stock Option Plan (the "Director
Plan") and 800,000 shares were reserved for issuance thereunder. Pursuant to the Director Plan, the Company's non-employee directors are granted an option to
acquire 30,000 shares of Common Stock upon their initial election to the Board ("Initial Options"). The Initial Options vest and become exercisable in
three equal annual installments on each of the first through third anniversaries of the grant date. On the fourth anniversary of a non-employee director's initial election to the Board and
on each subsequent anniversary thereafter, the director will be entitled to receive an option to acquire 10,000 shares of Common Stock ("Annual
Options"). Annual Options are fully vested and immediately exercisable on their date of grant. As of the end of the fiscal year, there were options for 370,000 shares
outstanding under the Director Plan. Since accepting the position of CEO, Mr. Jobs is no longer eligible for grants under the Director Plan. Directors also receive a $50,000 annual retainer
paid in quarterly increments. Directors do not receive any additional consideration for serving on committees or as committee chairperson. 
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation  
The current members of the Compensation Committee are Messrs. William V. Campbell, Millard S. Drexler, Albert Gore, Jr. and Dr. Arthur B. Levinson, none of whom
are employees of the Company and all of whom are considered "independent" directors under the applicable NASDAQ rules. At the beginning of the fiscal year, Mr. Jerome B. York served on the
Committee until his resignation in November 2002 at which time Mr. Drexler was appointed as a member of the Committee. No person who 
108


 
was
an employee of the Company in fiscal year 2003 served on the Compensation Committee. No executive officer of the Company (i) served as a member of the compensation committee (or other board
committee performing similar functions or, in the absence of any such committee, the board of directors) of another entity, one of whose executive officers served on the Company's Compensation
Committee, (ii) served as a director of another entity, one of whose executive officers served on the Company's Compensation Committee, or (iii) served as a member of the compensation
committee (or other board committee performing similar functions or, in the absence of any such committee, the board of directors) of another entity, one of whose executive officers served as a
director of the Company. 
 
 
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management     
The
following table sets forth certain information as of October 31, 2003 (the "Table Date") with respect to the beneficial ownership of the
Company's Common Stock by (i) each person the Company believes beneficially holds more than 5% of the outstanding shares of Common Stock; (ii) each director; (iii) each Named
Executive Officer listed in the Summary Compensation Table under the heading "Executive Compensation;" and (iv) all directors and executive
officers as a group. On the Table Date, 367,490,665 shares of Common Stock were issued and outstanding. Unless otherwise indicated, all persons named as beneficial owners of Common Stock have sole
voting power and sole investment power with respect to the shares indicated as beneficially owned. 
 
 
Security Ownership of Directors, Nominees and Executive Officers     



Name of Beneficial Owner 
 
Shares of Common Stock
Beneficially Owned(1)
 
Percent of Common Stock
Outstanding
 


Lord, Abbett & Co.
 
34,864,239
(2)
9.49
%


Steven P. Jobs
 
5,060,002
(3)
1.38
%


Fred D. Anderson
 
1,152,672
(4)
*
 


William V. Campbell
 
90,502
(5)
*
 


Timothy D. Cook
 
804,334
(6)
*
 


Millard S. Drexler
 
90,000
(7)
*
 


Albert Gore, Jr
 
—
 
*
 


Ronald B. Johnson
 
1,204,334
(8)
*
 


Arthur D. Levinson
 
231,600
(9)
*
 


Avadis Tevanian, Jr.
 
1,601,252
(10)
*
 


Jerome B. York
 
110,000
(5)
*
 


All executive officers and directors as a group (16 persons)
 
14,715,373
 
4.00
%





(1)Represents
shares of Common Stock held and/or options held by such individuals that were exercisable at the Table Date or within 60 days thereafter.
(2)Based
on a Form 13F-HR filed October 22, 2003 by Lord, Abbett & Co., 767 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10153.
(3)Includes
60,000 shares of Common Stock which Mr. Jobs has the right to acquire by exercise of stock options.
(4)Includes
1,150,000 shares of Common Stock which Mr. Anderson has the right to acquire by exercise of stock options.
(5)Includes
90,000 shares of Common Stock which Messrs. Campbell and York each have the right to acquire by exercise of stock options. 
109


 

(6)Includes
800,000 shares of Common Stock which Mr. Cook has the right to acquire by exercise of stock options.
(7)Includes
70,000 shares of Common Stock which Mr. Drexler has the right to acquire by exercise of stock options.
(8)Includes
1,200,000 shares of Common Stock which Mr. Johnson has the right to acquire by exercise of stock options.
(9)Includes
1,400 shares of Common Stock which Dr. Levinson holds indirectly and 30,000 shares of Common Stock which Dr. Levinson has the right to acquire by exercise of
stock options.
(10)Includes
1,600,000 shares of Common Stock which Dr. Tevanian has the right to acquire by exercise of stock options.
*Represents
less than 1% of the issued and outstanding shares of Common Stock on the Table Date. 
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance  
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, requires the Company's officers and directors, and persons who own more than ten percent of a
registered class of the Company's equity securities, to file reports of securities ownership and changes in such ownership with the Securities and Exchange Commission
("SEC"). Officers, directors and greater than ten percent shareholders also are required by rules promulgated by the SEC to furnish the Company with
copies of all Section 16(a) forms they file. 
Based
solely upon a review of the copies of such forms furnished to the Company or written representations that no Forms 5 were required, the Company believes that all Section 16(a) filing
requirements were met during fiscal year 2003, except that Messrs. Campbell and York each filed one Form 4 late under the new two-day reporting requirements. 
Equity Compensation Plan Information  
The following table sets forth certain information, as of September 27, 2003, concerning shares of common stock authorized for issuance under all of the Company's equity
compensation plans. 



 
 
(a)
Number of Securities to be Issued Upon Exercise of Options
 
(b)
Weighted Average Exercise Price of Outstanding Options
 
(c)
Number of Securities Remaining Available for Future Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans (Excluding Securities Reflected in Column (a))
 


Equity compensation plans approved by shareholders
 
19,507,624
 
$
18.75
 
29,142,907
(1)


Equity compensation plans not approved by shareholders
 
43,343,560
 
$
19.29
 
20,689,245
(2)


 
 

 

 

 


Total equity compensation plans (3)
 
62,851,184
 
$
19.12
 
49,832,152
(2)


 
 

 

 

 





(1)This
number includes 4,002,123 shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan, 310,000 shares available for issuance under the 1997 Director Stock
Option Plan and 24,830,784 shares available for issuance under the 2003 Employee Stock Plan. It does not include shares under the 1990 Stock Option Plan which was terminated in 1997. No new options
can be granted under the 1990 Stock Option Plan.
(2)On
October 22, 2003, the Company granted 6,697,368 shares under the 1997 Employee Stock Option Plan (the "1997 Plan") pursuant to the stock option exchange program (see
Part II, Item 8 of this 
110


 

Form 10-K
in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements at Note 8, under the heading "Employee Stock Option Exchange Program"). Following that grant, the Company
terminated the 1997 Plan, its only non-shareholder approved equity plan. All remaining unissued shares in that plan were cancelled and no new options can be granted under that plan. 


(3)This
table does not include 160,975 outstanding options assumed in connection with mergers with and acquisitions of the companies which originally established those plans. These
assumed options have a weighted average exercise price of $3.69 per share. No additional options may be granted under those assumed plans. 
Arrangements with Named Executive Officers  
Change In Control Arrangements—Stock Options  
In the event of a "change in control" of the Company, all outstanding options under the Company's stock option plans, except the Director Plan, will, unless otherwise
determined by the plan administrator, become exercisable in full, and will be cashed out at an amount equal to the difference between the applicable "change in control price" and the exercise price.
The Director Plan provides that upon a "change in control" of the Company, all unvested options held by non-employee directors will automatically become fully vested and exercisable and
will be cashed out at an amount equal to the difference between the applicable "change in control price" and the exercise price of the options. A "change in control" under these plans is generally
defined as (i) the acquisition by any person of 50% or more of the combined voting power of the Company's outstanding securities or (ii) the occurrence of a transaction requiring
shareholder approval and involving the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the Company or the merger of the Company with or into another corporation. 
In
addition, options granted to the Named Executive Officers generally provide that in the event there is a "change in control," as defined in the Company's stock option plans, and if in connection
with or following such "change in control," their employment is terminated without "Cause" or if they should resign for "Good Reason," those options outstanding that are not yet vested and exercisable
as of the date of such "change in control" shall become fully vested and exercisable. Generally, "Cause" is defined to include a felony conviction, willful disclosure of confidential information or
willful and continued failure to perform his or her employment duties. "Good Reason" includes resignation of employment as a result of a substantial diminution in position or duties, or an adverse
change in title or reduction in annual base salary. 
 
 
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions     
In
connection with a relocation assistance package, the Company loaned Mr. Johnson (Senior Vice President, Retail) $1,500,000 for the purchase of his principal residence. The loan is secured by
a deed of trust and is due and payable in May 2004. Under the terms of the loan, Mr. Johnson agreed that should he exercise any of his stock options prior to the due date of the loan, he
would pay the Company an amount equal to the lesser of (1) an amount equal to 50% of the total net gain realized from the exercise of the options; or (2) $375,000 multiplied by the
number of years between the exercise date and the date of the loan. The largest amount of the indebtedness outstanding on this loan during fiscal year 2003 was $1,500,000. Mr. Johnson repaid
the Company $750,000 during the fiscal year and the amount remaining on the loan is $750,000. 
Mr. Jerome
York, a member of the Board of Directors of the Company, is a member of an investment group that purchased MicroWarehouse, Inc.
("MicroWarehouse") in January 2000. Until September 2003, he served as its Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer. MicroWarehouse
is a reseller of computer hardware, software and peripheral products, including products made by the Company. During fiscal year 2003, MicroWarehouse accounted for 2.4% of the Company's net sales. The
Company also purchased products from MicroWarehouse for its own internal use. 
111


 

In
March 2002, the Company entered into a Reimbursement Agreement with its Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Steven P. Jobs, for the reimbursement of expenses incurred by Mr. Jobs in
the operation of his private plane when used for Apple business. The Reimbursement Agreement is effective for expenses incurred by Mr. Jobs for Apple business purposes since he took delivery of
the plane in May 2001. During 2003, the Company recognized a total of $403,766 in expenses pursuant to this reimbursement agreement related to expenses incurred by Mr. Jobs during 2003. 
 
 
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services     
The
following table sets forth the fees paid to the Company's independent auditor, KPMG LLP, during fiscal years 2003 and 2002. 
 
 
Audit and Non-Audit Fees     



 
 
2003
 
2002


Audit Fees
 
$
3,028,000
(1)
$
2,635,000


Audit-Related Fees
 
$
144,600
(2)
$
140,000


Tax Fees
 
$
1,017,100
(3)
$
1,055,000


All Other Fees
 
$
—
 
$
75,000


 
 

 



 
Total
 
$
4,189,700
 
$
3,905,000





(1)Audit
fees relate to professional services rendered in connection with the audit of the Company's annual financial statements, quarterly review of financial statements included in the
Company's Forms 10-Q, and audit services provided in connection with other statutory and regulatory filings.
(2)Audit-related
fees include professional services related to the audit of the Company's financial statements, consultation on accounting standards or transactions, and audits of
employee benefit plans.
(3)Tax
fees include $901,500 for professional services rendered in connection with tax compliance and preparation relating to the Company's expatriate program, tax audits and
international tax compliance; and $115,600 for tax consulting and planning services relating to interest computations and international tax changes. The Company does not engage KPMG to perform
personal tax services for its executive officers. 

Policy on Audit Committee Pre-Approval of Audit and Non-Audit Services Performed by the Independent Auditors  
Prior to the enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (the "Act"), the Company adopted an auditor independence policy that
banned its auditors from performing non-financial consulting services, such as information technology consulting and internal audit services. This auditor policy also mandates that an
annual budget for both audit and non-audit services be approved by the Audit Committee in advance, and that the Audit Committee be provided with quarterly reporting on actual spending.
This policy also mandates that no auditor engagements for non-audit services may be entered into without the express approval of the Audit Committee. 
112



  

 
 
PART IV     
 
  Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, and Reports on Form 8-K.     

(a)Items
Filed as Part of Report:


1.Financial
Statements 



The
financial statements of the Company filed as part of this report on Form 10-K are set forth in the Index to Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 of
this Form 10-K. 


2.Financial
Statement Schedules 



All
financial statement schedules have been omitted, since the required information is not present or is not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule, or because the
information required is included in the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto under Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. 


3.Exhibits 





 
 
 
 
Incorporated
by Reference
 
 


Exhibit
Number
 
 
 
Filed herewith


 
Exhibit Description
 
Form
 
Filing Date


3.1
 
Restated Articles of Incorporation, filed with the Secretary of State of the State of California on January 27, 1988.
 
S-3
 
7/27/88
 
 



3.2
 

Amendment to Restated Articles of Incorporation, filed with the Secretary of State of the State of California on May 4, 2000.
 

10-Q
 

5/11/00
 

 



3.3
 

By-Laws of the Company, as amended through March 19, 2003.
 

10-Q
 

5/13/03
 

 



4.2
 

Indenture dated as of February 1, 1994, between the Company and Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York.
 

10-Q
 

4/01/94
 

 



4.3
 

Supplemental Indenture dated as of February 1, 1994, among the Company, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, as resigning trustee, and Citibank, N.A., as successor trustee.
 

10-Q
 

4/01/94
 

 



4.5
 

Form of the Company's 61/2% Notes due 2004.
 

10-Q
 

4/01/94
 

 



4.8
 

Registration Rights Agreement, dated June 7, 1996 among the Company and Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Morgan Stanley & Co. Incorporated.
 

S-3
 

8/28/96
 

 



4.9
 

Certificate of Determination of Preferences of Series A Non-Voting Convertible Preferred Stock of Apple Computer, Inc.
 

10-K
 

9/26/97
 

 



10.A.3
 

Apple Computer, Inc. Savings and Investment Plan, as amended and restated effective as of October 1, 1990.
 

10-K
 

9/27/91
 

 



10.A.3-1
 

Amendment of Apple Computer, Inc. Savings and Investment Plan dated March 1, 1992.
 

10-K
 

9/25/92
 

 



10.A.3-2
 

Amendment No. 2 to the Apple Computer, Inc. Savings and Investment Plan.
 

10-Q
 

3/28/97
 

 



10.A.5
 

1990 Stock Option Plan, as amended through November 5, 1997.
 

10-Q
 

12/26/97
 

 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




113


 




10.A.6
 

Apple Computer, Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended through April 24, 2003.
 

S-8
 

6/24/03
 

 



10.A.8
 

Form of Indemnification Agreement between the Registrant and each officer of the Registrant.
 

10-K
 

9/26/97
 

 



10.A.43
 

NeXT Computer, Inc. 1990 Stock Option Plan, as amended.
 

S-8
 

3/21/97
 

 



10.A.49
 

1997 Employee Stock Option Plan, as amended through October 19, 2001.
 

10-K
 

9/28/02
 

 



10.A.50
 

1997 Director Stock Option Plan.
 

10-Q
 

3/27/98
 

 



10.A.51
 

2003 Employee Stock Option Plan, as amended through April 24, 2003.
 

10-Q
 

6/28/03
 

 



10.A.52
 

Reimbursement Agreement.
 

10-Q
 

6/29/02
 

 



10.A.53
 

Option Cancellation and Restricted Stock Award Agreement
 

10-Q
 

6/28/03
 

 



10.B.18
 

Custom Sales Agreement effective October 21, 2002 between the Registrant and International Business Machines Corporation.
 

 
 

 
 

X



14.1
 

Code of Ethics of the Company
 

 
 

 
 

X



21
 

Subsidiaries of Apple Computer, Inc.
 

 
 

 
 

X



23.1
 

Independent Auditors' Consent
 

 
 

 
 

X



31.1
 

Rule13a-14(a) / 15d-14(a) Certification of Chief Executive Officer
 

 
 

 
 

X



31.2
 

Rule13a-14(a) / 15d-14(a) Certification of Chief Financial Officer
 

 
 

 
 

X



32.1
 

Section 1350 Certification of Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer
 

 
 

 
 

X




(b)Reports
on Form 8-K 

The
Company filed a current report on Form 8-K on October 15, 2003, to reference and furnish as exhibits a press release and data sheet issued to the public by the Company on
October 15, 2003. 
The
Company filed a current report on Form 8-K on July 16, 2003, to reference and furnish as exhibits a press release and data sheet issued to the public by the Company on
July 16, 2003. 

114



  

 
 
SIGNATURES     
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, this 18th day of December 2003. 



 
 
APPLE COMPUTER, INC.



 
 

By:

/s/  FRED D. ANDERSON       Fred D. Anderson Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer



KNOW
ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes and appoints Steven P. Jobs and Fred D. Anderson, jointly and severally, his
attorneys-in-fact, each with the power of substitution, for him in any and all capacities, to sign any amendments to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and to
file the same, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all that each of said
attorneys-in-fact, or his substitute or substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof. 
Pursuant
to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated: 



Name
 
Title
 
Date


 
 

 
 

 


/s/  STEVEN P. JOBS       STEVEN P. JOBS
 
Chief Executive Officer and Director (Principal Executive Officer)
 
December 18, 2003



/s/  FRED D. ANDERSON       FRED D. ANDERSON
 

Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
 

December 18, 2003



/s/  PETER OPPENHEIMER       PETER OPPENHEIMER
 

Senior Vice President of Finance and Corporate Controller (Principal Accounting Officer)
 

December 18, 2003



/s/  WILLIAM V. CAMPBELL       WILLIAM V. CAMPBELL
 

Director
 

December 18, 2003



/s/  MILLARD S. DREXLER       MILLARD S. DREXLER
 

Director
 

December 18, 2003



/s/  ALBERT GORE, JR.       ALBERT GORE, JR.
 

Director
 

December 18, 2003



/s/  ARTHUR D. LEVINSON       ARTHUR D. LEVINSON
 

Director
 

December 18, 2003



/s/  JEROME B. YORK       JEROME B. YORK
 

Director
 

December 18, 2003



115




QuickLinks
PART I

Item 1. Business



Item 2. Properties
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders


PART II

Item 5. Market for the Registrant's Common Equity and Related Shareholder Matters
Item 6. Selected Financial Data
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations



Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk



Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data


CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (In millions, except share amounts)

CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS (In millions, except share and per share amounts)

CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY (In millions, except share amounts which are in thousands)

CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (In millions)

NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


REPORT OF INDEPENDENT AUDITORS



Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures

PART III

Item 10. Directors and Executive Officers of the Registrant
Item 11. Executive Compensation

SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE

AGGREGATED OPTION EXERCISES IN THE LAST FISCAL YEAR AND FISCAL YEAR-END OPTION VALUES

Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management

Security Ownership of Directors, Nominees and Executive Officers

Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services

Audit and Non-Audit Fees

PART IV

Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, and Reports on Form 8-K.


SIGNATURES





EX-10.B18
3
a2124888zex-10_b18.htm
EX-10.B17



Exhibit 10.B.18
 
CUSTOM
SALES AGREEMENT
BASE
AGREEMENT






International Business
  Machines Corporation


 


281 Winter Street
Waltham, MA  02154



 
Agreement No.  000451
 



Customer:


 


Apple Computer, Inc.




 


 


1 Infinite Loop




 


 


Cupertino, CA  95014




 


 


USA



 
This Custom Sales Agreement between Apple Computer,
Inc. (“Apple”) and International Business Machines Corporation (“IBM”), which
consists of this Base Agreement and Statement of Work Attachments, shall be
referred to as the “Agreement”.  The
term of this Agreement commences on October 21, 2002 and expires on October 20,
2007.
 
By signing below, the parties each agree to be
bound by the terms and conditions of this Agreement including the initial
Statements of Work, Attachments No. 1 and No. 2, and no additional signature on
those Statements of Work are required. 
Subsequent Statement of Work Attachments under this Agreement must be
signed by the parties to become effective.
 
Upon signature by both parties, it is agreed this
Agreement constitutes the complete and exclusive agreement between them
superseding all contemporaneous or prior agreements, written or oral, relating
to the subject matter notwithstanding anything contained in any document issued
by either party, except the Confidentiality Agreement (Mutual), Agreement No.
X1329, as amended, signed by IBM and Apple with an effective date of April 1,
1999.  This Agreement may not be amended
or modified except by a written amendment signed by duly authorized signatories
of both parties.
 
The parties expressly acknowledge
that they have received and are in possession of a copy of any referenced item
not physically attached to the Agreement and any such item will be treated as
if attached.
 
Accepted and Agreed To:
 



Apple
  Computer, Inc.


 


International
  Business Machines Corporation




 


 


 




By:


/s/
  Jeff Williams


 


By:


/s/
  Scottie Ginn




Name:


Jeff
  Williams


Name:


Scottie
  Ginn




Title:


V.P.
  Worldwide Procurement


 


Title:


V.P.
  Standard Products




Date:


December
  6, 2002


 


Date:


December
  12, 2002










1.0           DEFINITIONS
Capitalized terms in this
Agreement have the following meanings. 
An Attachment may define additional terms and conditions; however, those
terms and conditions will apply only to that Attachment.  References in this Agreement to a gender
include references to all genders, and references to the singular include
references to the plural, and vice versa. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the term “party” means a party to
this Agreement.  The words “include”,
“includes” and “including”, when used in this Agreement shall be deemed to be
followed by the phrase “without limitation.” 
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this Agreement to
sections, exhibits, schedules, appendices and attachments shall be deemed
references to sections of, and exhibits, schedules, appendices and attachments
to this Agreement.  Unless the context
otherwise requires, the word “or” shall be disjunctive and the words “hereof”,
“hereby” and “herein” and words of similar meaning when used in this Agreement
shall refer to this Agreement in its entirety and not to any particular
article, section or provision of such Agreement.  Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “IBM, and
its Plant” shall be read to include “as the case may be.”
1.1           “ASIC
Products” means a custom Product that is an application specific integrated
circuit.
1.2           “Authorized
Purchaser” means the entity that placed (or, in the case of Apple, had a
Designee place) the Purchase Order for particular Products or Services,
provided such entity is (i) Apple, (ii) any of Apple’s wholly-owned
Subsidiaries, including Apple Computer International and Apple Computer
Limited, or (iii) another Apple-Related Company authorized to place Purchase
Orders under this Agreement as set forth in Section 2.4, below, and not a
Designee or any other third party.
1.3           “Base
Agreement” means this document, exclusive of Statement of Work Attachments.
1.4           “Business
Days” means a regularly scheduled day of work in the United States for both
Apple and IBM.
1.5           “Designee”
means an original equipment manufacturer, contract manufacturer or other third
party engaged by Apple or an Apple-Related Company to manufacture Apple-branded
products or subassemblies for Apple-branded products and authorized by Apple,
pursuant to Section 2.5, below, to purchase Products and perform other tasks on
Apple’s behalf.







1.6           “Exhibit
4 Products” means those specific Products set forth on the attached Exhibit 4,
including those in its footnotes.
1.7           “Failed
Units” means specific units of a particular Exhibit 4 Product, or any other
ASIC Product that the parties may agree to treat in a similar manner, sold
hereunder that exhibited a Failure or can be predicted with a reasonable
certainty to exhibit a Failure prior to the expiration of the [**] commencing
on the date such units were manufactured.
1.8           “Failure”
means that the unit of Exhibit 4 Product or the unit of any other ASIC Product
that the parties may agree to treat in a similar manner does not operate in
conformance with the agreed upon (in writing) specifications (in ASIC Products,
such specifications will be set forth in the RTM as that term is defined in the
ASIC Development Agreement, Agreement No. 000798) and [**] and which reasonably
could not have been detected by Apple through system, subsystem, and part testing
activities which are no less thorough than (i) for both the ASIC and PowerPC
Exhibit 4 Products, those testing activities generally conducted by Apple but
not less thorough than those testing activities generally conducted by other
personal computer manufacturers (but not microprocessor  manufacturers) in the industry, or (ii) for
PowerPC Exhibit 4 Products, after a test specification is agreed upon by IBM
and Apple pursuant to Section 14.1 of this Agreement, those testing activities
to be conducted by Apple as described in such test specification.
1.9           “Failure
Threshold.”  For each Exhibit 4 Product,
or any other ASIC Product that the parties may agree to treat in a similar
manner, sold under this Agreement, the Failure Threshold shall be [**] of the total
number of units of the particular Product manufactured [**] and shipped by IBM.
1.10         “Forecast”
means a non-binding monthly forecast in substantially the same format shown in
Exhibit 3 specifying the number of Products Apple anticipates that its Authorized
Purchasers and Designees will purchase from IBM each month during the specified
period.
1.11         “Item” means any part, specification,
design, document, report, data or the like which Apple delivers to IBM under
this Agreement.
1.12         “Plant” means the IBM-Related Company described in
Section 2.6.
1.13         “PowerPC Product” means a stand-alone
microprocessor Product based on the PowerPC Architecture.
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







1.14         “Product”
means production units to be sold or purchased under this Agreement, including
the Exhibit 4 Products.  Products may be
“standard” (available for purchase by one or more customers other than Apple)
or “custom” (resulting from IBM performing Services for Apple under this
Agreement and not available for IBM’s own use (other than ordinary
manufacturing activities) or for purchase by any other customer).  Standard Products may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, PowerPC Products and SRAM Products.  Custom Products may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, PowerPC Products and ASIC Products.  Product shall be designated as “standard” or
“custom” in the Attachment applicable to such Product.  Products shall not include Prototypes.
1.15         “Prototype” means a preliminary version
of an ASIC Product which may or may not be functional, is intended for internal
use and testing and not for resale, and is not suitable for production in
commercial quantities.  The terms and
conditions relating to Prototypes are set forth in the ASIC Development
Agreement, Agreement No. 000798, signed by the parties on September 26, 2001.
1.16         “Purchase
Order” means a written order containing the terms set forth in Section 3.2,
below, issued by an Authorized Purchaser or Designee pursuant to this
Agreement.
1.17         “Purchase
Order Lead Time” means the required minimum amount of time between IBM’s
receipt of the Purchase Order and the Scheduled Shipment Date.  Purchase Order Lead Times will be
established for each Product sold hereunder and shall be set forth in the
Attachment hereto which is applicable to such Product.
1.18         “Related
Company” of a party hereunder shall mean a corporation, company or other entity
which controls or is controlled by such party or by another Related Company of
such party, where control means ownership or control, direct or indirect, of
more than fifty (50) percent of:  (i)
the outstanding voting shares or securities (representing the right to vote for
the election of directors or managing authority), or (ii) the ownership
interests representing the right to make decisions for such a corporation,
company or other entity (as the case may be in a partnership, joint venture or
unincorporated association having no outstanding shares or securities).  However, any such corporation, company or
other entity shall be deemed to be a Related Company of such party only so long
as such ownership or control exists.
1.19         “Related
Company Agreement” means the agreement to be executed by the parties and by the
Authorized Purchaser in the form attached hereto as Exhibit 1.
1.20         “Sales
Acknowledgment” means a written sales acknowledgment or other acceptance
document issued by IBM or its Plant in response to a Purchase Order.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment
request.  Such omitted information has
been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







1.21         “Scheduled Shipment
Date” means:  [**] and (iii) in either
case, if later rescheduled by the Authorized Purchaser or Designee pursuant to
Section 5.3, below, the rescheduled date.
1.22         “Service”
means any design or engineering work that IBM performs pursuant to this
Agreement.
2.0           AGREEMENT STRUCTURE
2.1           This Agreement consists of:  (i) the Base Agreement which defines the
basic terms and conditions of the relationship between the parties; and (ii)
Attachments which specify the details of specific work tasks (Services) or
Products.  An Attachment may include
additional or differing terms and conditions from the Base Agreement, however
such terms and conditions will apply only to that Attachment.  Attachments may also include any
specifications agreed to by the parties applicable to the specific work tasks
(Services) or Product under that Attachment.
2.2           If there is a conflict or ambiguity
among the terms and conditions of the various documents, Attachment terms and
conditions govern only as to the Attachment.
2.3           Except
for Product part numbers, Product descriptions (e.g. 1 GHz microprocessor),
prices, quantities, bill-to locations, ship-to locations, shipping instructions
(limited to preferred carrier, carrier account number, and expedited shipping
method, if any), and Scheduled Shipment Dates, any other terms and conditions
on Purchase Orders and Sales Acknowledgements are void and replaced by this
Agreement.
2.4           Apple
and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, including Apple Computer International and
Apple Computer Limited, may issue Purchase Orders for Products and Services
under this Agreement.  Either party may
include its other Related Companies under this Agreement by prior written
agreement with the other party.  Apple
will cause any wholly-owned subsidiary or Related Company purchasing Product
under this Agreement to execute a Related Company Agreement with Apple and IBM
binding them to the terms and conditions of this Agreement.
2.5           Apple
may, in a writing provided to IBM, name one or more agents who are authorized
by Apple to issue Purchase Orders for Products with Apple part numbers,
receive, reschedule or cancel deliveries of such Products ordered pursuant to
such Purchase Orders, process warranty claims related to such Products and pay
for such Products and any associated freight costs (“Designees”).  Designees are not authorized to act for
Apple in any other capacity or to bind Apple in any other respect
whatsoever.  Apple may disclose to its
Designees those terms and conditions of this Agreement specifically set forth
in Exhibit 2, hereto, and each party agrees that it will not disclose any other
terms or conditions of this Agreement to any Designee without the other’s prior
written consent.  Apple represents and
warrants that before giving notice to IBM
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







appointing a Designee, Apple will have executed an
appropriate agreement with such Designee establishing the limited agency described
in this Section, establishing that the Designee is not a third party
beneficiary of this Agreement, protecting the confidentiality of any terms or
conditions of this Agreement that Apple may disclose to the Designee pursuant
to this Section, as well as any Confidential Information (as
that term is defined in the Confidentiality Agreement (Mutual), Agreement No.
X1329, as amended, signed by IBM and Apple with an effective date of April 1,
1999) that may be disclosed to the Designee, and securing such Designee’s
agreement to be bound to those terms and conditions set forth in Exhibit
2.  No Designee may receive Confidential
Information prior to executing an agreement with the party disclosing the
Confidential Information to the Designee, such agreement including restrictions
on nondisclosure and nonuse at least as stringent as those restrictions in
Agreement No. X1329.  Each Designee shall be subject to all of the
obligations and responsibilities of “Apple” under this Agreement with respect
to the terms and conditions in Exhibit 2. 
Apple, not its Designee, will remain responsible for fulfilling all of
its other obligations under the Agreement not delegated to such Designee
pursuant to this Section.  Should any
Designee fail to pay an invoice from IBM or a Plant within fifteen (15) days
after IBM provided written notice to the Designee and to Apple that such
invoice was overdue, IBM will provide Apple written notice of such Designee’s
continued failure to so pay, and Apple agrees to pay, or cause the Designee to
pay, in full, all of such sums due and unpaid, together with interest from the
date payment was due from the Designee, within thirty (30) days after receipt
of said later notice.  IBM will not be
obligated to exhaust remedies against any Designee for breach of any of its
obligations before seeking enforcement directly against Apple except as
expressly set forth in this Section. 
Apple shall hold harmless IBM from and against any and all claims or
actions of any kind made by any Designee against IBM, which claims or actions
in any way arise out of or are related to any such Designee’s role hereunder or
Apple’s termination of such role.  Apple
may withdraw a Designee by providing IBM ten (10) days prior written notice;
and thereafter (i) the Designee will no longer be authorized to purchase
Product on Apple’s behalf or perform any other of the tasks described in this
Section, and (ii) Apple will either cancel any open Purchase Orders placed on
its behalf by such withdrawn Designee and pay any applicable cancellation
charges therefor or take delivery of and pay for any Products covered by such
Purchase Orders.
2.6           Notwithstanding
any other provision hereof, for US sales (sales for which IBM ships to the
Authorized Purchaser or Designee and title transfers within the United States),
the contract of sale for Products purchased under this Agreement will be
between IBM and the Authorized Purchaser or, in the case of Designees,
Apple.  For non-U.S. sales (sales for
which IBM ships to the Authorized Purchaser or Designee with shipment and title
transfer outside of the United States), the contract of sale for Products
purchased under this Agreement will be between the IBM Related Company that
will supply the Products (“the Plant”) and the Authorized Purchaser or, in the
case of Designees, Apple, as the case may be. 
It is agreed that all such Purchase Orders will incorporate the terms
and conditions of this Agreement whether expressly referenced or not and will
only be accepted subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement.  Purchase Orders will be accepted by the
Plant when it issues the Sales Acknowledgment accepting the Purchase Order,
thereby creating the contract of sale for the Products.  Apple reserves the right to
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 







enforce the provisions of this Agreement on behalf of
its Authorized Purchasers and IBM reserves the right to enforce the provisions
of this Agreement on behalf of its Plant(s) and any other IBM-Related Companies
added to this Agreement.  IBM represents
and warrants that it has and will have, throughout the term of this Agreement,
an agreement with the Plant, wherein the Plant agrees to be bound to the terms
and conditions set forth in IBM’s sales agreements for IBM Microelectronics
Division products.
2.7           Any
purchase order submitted by an Authorized Purchaser or Designee during the term
of this Agreement (whether or not it references this Agreement) for products or
services from IBM’s Microelectronics Division shall be subject to and governed
by the terms and conditions of this Agreement, unless:  (i) there is another signed, written
agreement in place between IBM and Apple with respect to the subject matter of
such purchase order; or (ii) the product or service was ordered by a Designee
for use in or in connection with its own or another customer’s product and not
in an Apple-branded product.  The
foregoing shall be in effect regardless of whether Apple and IBM have executed
any Attachment specific to the Products, or Services ordered.  If no such Attachment has been executed,
then the terms and conditions of the Attachment most recently executed by Apple
and IBM shall control, except with respect to those matters which are uniquely
applicable to the specific Product or Service in question (such as specific NRE
charges, Product pricing, specific Items and IBM deliverables, Product names
and descriptions, Purchase Order Lead Times, and Forecasts).
3.0           PRODUCT DEMAND FORECASTS AND ORDERS
3.1           At
or before execution of the Agreement and each month during the term of the
Agreement, on or before the last Business Day of the month, Apple will provide
IBM an [**] rolling Forecast of Apple’s and its Authorized Purchasers’
requirements for Exhibit 4 Products and any other ASIC Products that the
parties may agree to treat in a similar manner, the first month of the Forecast
being the month following that month in which the Forecast is placed.  [**] 
If Apple discovers an error or omission in an accepted Forecast, Apple
may submit a corrected Forecast; such corrected Forecast will be deemed
accepted provided it meets the volume requirements described above and was
submitted by the tenth (10th) day of the first month in the
Forecast.  If IBM becomes concerned that
Apple’s Forecasts are inaccurate, IBM may escalate that concern to the Apple
executive designated for such purpose pursuant to Section 21.2.  Forecasts shall constitute good faith
estimates of Apple’s anticipated requirements for Products but shall not
obligate Apple or any Authorized Purchaser or Designee to purchase the
forecasted units.
3.2          
IBM will accept Purchase Orders for Products or Services placed by an
Authorized Purchaser or Designee in accordance with the terms and conditions of
this Agreement.  Purchase Orders will
specify (i) the Purchase Order number, (ii) the Authorized Purchaser’s or
Designee’s tax status (exempt or non-exempt), (iii) the ship-to location, (iv)
the bill-to location, (v) the order-from location, (vi) shipping instructions
(including preferred carrier and carrier account
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







number), (vii) requested shipment dates, (viii) the
name of the Authorized Purchaser’s or Designee’s contact, (ix) Product part
numbers and the quantity ordered (in increments of the Minimum Order Quantity
(“MOQ”),  (x) the applicable unit price,
and (xi) the agreement number of this Agreement.  Additionally, Purchase Orders placed by a Designee shall clearly
state that such Designee is purchasing “as the agent of Apple Computer,
Inc.”  Purchase Order Lead Times and any
applicable MOQ’s will be as set forth in the relevant Attachment.
3.3           IBM
and its Plants will respond promptly regarding all Purchase Orders placed under
this Agreement, providing a Sales Acknowledgment accepting or rejecting the
Purchase Order within [**] Business Days after receipt of any Purchase Order
placed with the requisite Purchase Order Lead Time and within [**] Business
Days after receipt of any Purchase Order placed with less than the requisite
Purchase Order Lead Time.  Purchase
Orders for Exhibit 4 Products and any other ASIC Product that the parties may
agree to treat in a similar manner may be rejected by IBM or its Plant only if:
(i)            the entity placing the Purchase
Order is not an Authorized Purchaser or Designee;
(ii)           the Purchase Order does not comply
with the terms and conditions of this Agreement;
(iii)          the Purchase Order exceeds Apple’s
current credit-limit established pursuant to Section 6.3, below;
(iv)          [**];
(v)           IBM has provided notice to Apple
pursuant to Section 3.5 that it no longer intends to manufacture such Product
or Service and the Purchase Order requests delivery after the end of the period
identified in Section 3.5;
(vi)         the Purchase Order is placed with less
than the requisite Purchase Order Lead Time; or
 
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







(vii)         the Purchase Order requests shipment of
a PowerPC Product with a specified frequency that exceeds the then available
product frequencies as set forth in Exhibit 4.
If IBM rejects a Purchase Order for any of the
above-stated reasons, IBM will provide Apple with prompt written notice of such
rejection, and Apple may escalate the discussions to the IBM executive
designated for such purpose pursuant to Section 21.2.
3.4           IBM
will specify the Scheduled Shipment Date for the Products ordered in the
applicable Sales Acknowledgment.  [**]
3.5           Nothing
herein shall prevent IBM from discontinuing the manufacture of a particular
Product.  In the event that IBM decides
to do so, however, IBM will provide Apple with at least [**] written notice
before it discontinues any Product.  IBM
will be obligated to accept and fulfill all orders for such Products placed by
an Authorized Purchaser or Designee within the [**] notice period, except to
the extent IBM does not have manufacturing capacity available to manufacture quantities ordered [**].  Apple must
take final delivery of all Products ordered pursuant to this Section during the
[**]
notice period [**] unless IBM in its sole
discretion extends the last date of delivery in order to allow for the
manufacture of quantities [**]. To the extent IBM accepts Purchase Orders issued pursuant to this
Section for quantities in excess of [**], IBM shall not be obligated under Section 3.3 to respond to such
Purchase Order within [**] Business Days, [**] 
This Section 3.5 shall not apply to any products sold or manufactured by
IBM as of the date of the Agreement other than those Products set forth in an
Attachment.
4.0           DELIVERY
4.1           The
Authorized Purchaser or Designee is responsible for all freight and duty
charges from IBM’s shipping location. 
Title and risk of loss will pass to the Authorized Purchaser or Designee
upon tender to the carrier for shipment to such Authorized Purchaser or
Designee.
4.2           In
the event that IBM and Apple enter into an agreement to provide just-in-time
delivery of Product utilizing hub locations, such agreement will be set forth
in a separate written agreement as an attachment to this Agreement and signed
by each party.
4.3           If
IBM or its Plant foresees any supply constraint with respect to an accepted
Purchase Order, IBM will provide prompt notice to Apple and, if the Purchase
Order was placed by someone other than Apple, to the Authorized Purchaser or
Designee who placed the Purchase Order. 
Apple and IBM will then discuss likely shipment recovery plans, and if
they are unable to do so to Apple’s satisfaction, the parties will immediately
escalate the issue to the IBM and Apple executives designated for such purpose
pursuant to Section 21.2 and the parties will use reasonable efforts to
promptly resolve the discrepancy.  If
IBM’s supply of the Product and / or 
 
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







Services ordered by Authorized Purchasers or Designees
and accepted by IBM hereunder becomes constrained [**] IBM may reduce the
quantities of Products and / or Services to be supplied to Authorized
Purchasers or Designees [**].
4.4           If
IBM or its Plant foresees any delivery delay with respect to an accepted
Purchase Order, IBM will provide prompt notice to Apple and, if the Purchase
Order was placed by someone other than Apple, to the Authorized Purchaser or
Designee who placed the Purchase Order. 
Apple and IBM will then discuss likely shipment recovery plans, and if
they are unable to do so to Apple’s satisfaction, the parties will immediately
escalate the issue to the IBM and Apple executives designated for such purpose
pursuant to Section 21.2 and the parties will use reasonable efforts to
promptly resolve the delay. [**]
 
5.0           CANCELLATION AND RESCHEDULING
5.1           Cancellation.  Authorized Purchasers and Designees may
cancel accepted Purchase Orders for Products for their convenience at any time,
provided they pay IBM or its Plant applicable cancellation charges as set forth
in this Section 5.1.
5.1.1        Exhibit 4 Products.  Authorized Purchasers and Designees may
cancel Purchase Orders for Exhibit 4 Products (and any other ASIC Product that
the parties may agree to treat in a similar manner) without charge, provided
they give IBM written notice [**] days prior to the original Scheduled Shipment
Date.  If the Authorized Purchaser or
Designee provides IBM written notice canceling a Purchase Order for such
Products [**] days prior to the original Scheduled Shipment Date, the
Authorized Purchaser or Designee will pay IBM [**] of the purchase price of the
Products ordered.  Promptly after
receiving notice canceling a Purchase Order for Exhibit 4 Products, IBM will
provide Apple and the Authorized Purchaser or Designee who placed the Purchase
Order written notice of any applicable cancellation charges.  The Authorized Purchaser or Designee will
promptly after receiving IBM’s notice, issue a Purchase Order to IBM for such
charges, and IBM will invoice the same upon receipt.  Neither Apple nor the Authorized Purchaser will be liable for any
other fees or costs not expressly set forth in this Section when canceling a
Purchaser Order for Exhibit 4 Products.
                5.1.2        Other Products.  If the Authorized Purchaser or Designee
provides IBM written notice canceling a Purchase Order for any other Product,
the party canceling the Purchase
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 







Order shall pay the cancellation
charges set forth in the applicable Product Attachment.  IBM will provide Apple and the Authorized
Purchaser or Designee who placed the Purchase Order prompt written notice of
any applicable cancellation charges. 
The Authorized Purchaser or Designee canceling the Purchaser Order will,
upon receipt of IBM’s written notice, promptly issue a Purchase Order to IBM
for such charges and IBM will invoice the same upon receipt.  Neither Apple nor the Authorized Purchaser
will be liable for any other fees or costs except those expressly set forth in
this Section when canceling a Purchase Order for other Products.
5.2           If an Authorized Purchaser or
Designee cancels a Purchase Order for Services for its convenience, IBM will
cease further work in connection with the Purchase Order and the Authorized
Purchaser or Designee will pay IBM for reasonable costs actually incurred by
IBM pursuant to such Purchase Order before the Authorized Purchaser or
Designee’s notice of cancellation.  IBM
must make its claim for cancellation charges and provide supporting
documentation within forty-five (45) days of the date of cancellation.  Any claim not made within such forty-five
(45) day period will be deemed waived.  In
the event IBM is more than twenty-one (21) days late in completing a Purchase
Order for Services, the Authorized Purchaser or Designee may cancel such
Purchase Order and the Authorized Purchaser or Designee’s sole obligation will
be to pay IBM for any deliverables ordered pursuant to that Purchase Order that
were actually completed or delivered by IBM before the Authorized Purchaser or
Designee’s notice of cancellation, provided that any periods of such delay that
were caused by the Authorized Purchaser or Designee shall be excluded for
purposes of calculating the length of the delay hereunder.
5.3           Rescheduling.  The Authorized Purchaser or Designee may
reschedule accepted Purchase Orders for Products in accordance with this
Section 5.3.
5.3.1                        Exhibit 4
Products.  The Authorized Purchaser or Designee may reschedule a
Scheduled Shipment Date for an Exhibit 4
Product or any other ASIC Product that the parties may agree to treat in a
similar manner to a later date provided:  (i) it sends IBM or its Plant written notice of the request to
reschedule; (ii) the Product being rescheduled has not yet been shipped; and
(iii) the requested rescheduled shipment date is within [**] after the original Scheduled Shipment Date.  If the foregoing requirements are met, [**] will be imposed by IBM or its Plant
for rescheduling.
5.3.2                        Other
Products.  The Authorized Purchaser or Designee may reschedule an
order for any other Product to a later date only upon prior written notice to
IBM and as set forth in the applicable Product Attachment.  In the event of a reschedule which exceeds
the rescheduling rights set forth in the applicable Attachment, IBM may invoice
the Authorized Purchaser or Designee the quoted price for any Products
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







that were delivered or ready for shipment pursuant to
that Purchase Order on the date the Authorized Purchaser’s or Designee’s notice
was received by IBM or its Plant, and the cancellation charges set forth in the
applicable Attachment for any Products on that Purchase Order that were not
already delivered or ready for shipment when IBM or its Plant received such
notice.
5.4           Product
Remix without Charge.  Apple and its
Authorized Purchasers and Designees may request that IBM or its Plant ship a
different mix of Products than those originally ordered.  IBM or its Plant will agree to do so without
charge provided:  (i) Apple, the Authorized
Purchaser or the Designee gives written notice to IBM or its Plant, as the case
may be, at least [**] before the Scheduled Shipment Date;  (ii) all substituted Products are within the
same Product-family as those originally ordered.  Products that utilize the same design revision, materials and
manufacturing process from wafer start to module final test are within the same
Product-family; (iii) the total number of units ordered remains the same; (iv)
the change will not have any significant negative manufacturing or financial
impact to IBM or its Plant in IBM or its Plant’s sole and reasonable judgment;
and (v) subject to availability of Products that permit the requested
remixing.  Changes that do not meet the
requirements of this Section may be accepted for similar treatment in IBM’s or
its Plant’s sole discretion.  If IBM or
its Plant agrees to change an order as described in this Section, as a
condition of obtaining such agreement, the Authorized Purchaser or Designee
will promptly cancel the original Purchase Order without incurring any
cancellation or other charge and place a new one for the modified Product mix.
6.0           PRICES AND PAYMENT
6.1           Exhibit 4 Products.   Prices for the Exhibit 4 Products will be
as set forth in the attached Exhibit 5.
6.2           Other Products and Services.   Prices for Products and Services not set
forth in Exhibit 4 shall be as set forth in either (i) the Sales Acknowledgment
and accepted Purchase Order, provided the price in both is the same, or (ii)
the applicable Attachment (as the same may be amended from time to time), or
(iii) the most recent uncontested notice, as set forth below.  If there is a conflict between the prices
set forth in (i), (ii) and (iii), the prices in the most recent document(s)
will govern.  IBM and Apple will review
prices for Products on a quarterly basis at least thirty (30) days prior to the
start of each calendar quarter.  If the parties agree to revise prices during a quarterly review, IBM will
document that agreement in a written communication to Apple, and, unless Apple
contests the documentation in writing within three (3) Business Days after
receiving IBM’s written communication, the revised prices in such written
communication will be deemed effective as of the first Business Day of the applicable calendar
quarter and will apply to any Products originally scheduled for shipment during
that quarter.  For purposes of this section, e-mail transmissions shall be considered
valid written notification.   If the parties are unable to
agree on revised prices, the most recent
prices, as set forth in the applicable
 
[**] = information redacted
pursuant to a confidential treatment request. 
Such omitted information has been filed separately with the Securities
and Exchange Commission.







Attachment, Sales Acknowledgment and accepted Purchase
Order, as appropriate, or uncontested written notice from IBM, will be used until such time as the
parties agree differently.
6.3           Invoices and Payments.  IBM or its Plant shall invoice the
Authorized Purchaser or Designee after the Products have been shipped, or the
Services provided.  Payment will be due
within thirty (30) days after the date of invoice.  Late payment of invoices may be assessed a charge equal to the
lesser of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month or the statutorily maximum
rate of interest in accordance with the laws of the State of New York.  In addition, if an Authorized Purchaser or
Designee’s account balance exceeds Apple’s credit limit with IBM, or becomes
delinquent, IBM may stop shipments to the Authorized Purchaser or Designee or
ship to such party on a prepaid basis until the account is compliant.
6.4           Credit Limits.  At any time, Apple may request that IBM
disclose the credit limit that IBM’s Microelectronics’ Division is then willing
to extend to Apple and the aggregate amounts then outstanding against such credit
limit.  IBM will respond promptly.  IBM will notify Apple within one (1)
Business Day after any decrease of IBM’s credit limit for Apple.  IBM will decrease Apple’s credit limit only
if IBM, in its sole and reasonable discretion, believes that there has been an
increase in the risk of extending credit to Apple.
6.5           [**]
Costs. IBM will be solely responsible for all [**] incurred in connection with
[**] of the microprocessor Products set forth on Exhibit 4, and under no
circumstances will Apple be liable to IBM for any such costs (except to the extent such costs were
included in the agreed purchase price of a Product and Apple is liable for that
purchase price pursuant to this Agreement without reference to this Section
6.5).
 
7.0           TERMINATION
7.1           If either party materially breaches a
term or condition of this Base Agreement or an Attachment, the other party may,
at its option, terminate this Agreement or any or all Attachments provided the
party in breach is given written notice and fails to cure such breach within thirty
days (30) days after the notice of termination, or immediately in the event of
(i) insolvency, dissolution or liquidation by or against the other party,  (ii) any assignment of the other party’s
assets for the benefit of creditors; (iii) any act or omission of an act by the other party
demonstrating its inability to pay debts generally as they become due, or (iv)
any transfer of substantially all of the other party’s business or assets to a
third party, unless such transfer is effectuated in accordance with Section
21.4, below.
7.2           If IBM terminates pursuant to Section
7.1, at IBM’s sole discretion, all previously accepted Purchase Orders may be
canceled and Apple shall pay (i) for any Products delivered or ready for shipment when the
Agreement terminated, the full price determined in accordance with Section 6.1
or 6.2, as applicable; (ii) for any Products not delivered or ready for
shipment when the Agreement terminated, the actual amount IBM paid for any long
lead time materials authorized by Apple and procured in accordance with the
terms and conditions of an applicable
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







Attachment or this
Agreement and any applicable cancellation charges set forth in this Agreement
or the Attachment for such Products (IBM agrees to attempt to mitigate any
amounts payable by Apple for any long lead time materials through such means as
use in other manufacturing activities or sale, if practicable); (iii) for any
Services completed when the Agreement terminated, the full price determined in
accordance with the applicable Attachment; and (iv) for any Services not
delivered or completed when the Agreement terminated, the applicable
cancellation charges determined in accordance with the applicable Attachment,
or, if none, in accordance with Section 5.2 of this Agreement.  Under
no circumstances will the total amount due for a Product or Services under (i),
(ii), (iii), or (iv), above, exceed the full price for such Product or Service
determined in accordance with Section 6.1 or 6.2, as applicable, and any
applicable Attachment.
7.3           If Apple terminates pursuant to
Section 7.1, at Apple’s discretion all previously accepted Purchase Orders may
be canceled and no cancellation charges (including long-lead-time materials)
will apply.
7.4           Apple may terminate this Agreement or
any or all Attachments for convenience by providing written notice to IBM at
least twelve (12) months before the termination date.  If Apple terminates this Agreement, or any or all Attachments,
for its convenience, all previously accepted Purchase Orders will be filled,
but IBM shall not be obligated to accept further Purchase Orders pursuant to
the terminated Agreement or Attachment, as the case may be, after receiving
notice of termination.
7.5           All amounts due for Products or
Services under this Agreement shall be paid in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this Agreement notwithstanding any termination of this Agreement
for any reason, provided, however, that in the event this Agreement is
terminated pursuant to Section 7.1 all amounts due and payable to the
non-terminating party as of the date of such termination shall become immediately
due and payable.
7.6           This Base Agreement will continue
after its termination or expiration with respect to any Attachments already in
place until they expire, or are terminated or performed.  Applicable Items shall be returned or disposed
of as directed by Apple in writing at Apple’s expense after a termination or
expiration of this Agreement or relevant Attachment.
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







8.0           CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
8.1           In the event IBM or Apple wishes to
disclose specific confidential information to the other in connection with IBM
furnishing Products and/or Services hereunder, such information shall be
disclosed only pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Apple Computer, Inc.
Confidentiality Agreement (Mutual), Agreement No. X1329, as amended, signed by
IBM and Apple with an effective date of April 1, 1999, the current version of
which, and all currently effective Amendments to the same, are attached hereto
as Exhibit 6, or pursuant to the terms and conditions of another comparable
confidential disclosure agreement. The parties agree to treat the terms and
conditions of this Agreement as confidential information.
9.0           LICENSE
9.1           No license, immunity or other right
is granted herein to any Authorized Purchaser or Designee whether directly or
by implication, estoppel or otherwise, with respect to any patent, trademark,
copyright, mask work, trade secret, utility, model, or know-how, or other
intellectual property right of IBM. 
Nothing herein shall abrogate any rights that may arise by operation of
the patent exhaustion doctrine.
10.0         TRADEMARK
10.1         Nothing in this
Agreement grants either party any rights to use the other party’s trademarks or
trade names, directly or indirectly, in connection with any product, service,
promotion, or to make any publication or publicity without prior written
approval of the other party or trademark or trade name owner.
 
11.0         INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY AND INDEMNIFICATION
11.1         Neither party is required by this
Agreement to knowingly infringe any valid patent or other intellectual property
of a third party. If either party has reason to believe that any Item, Product
or portion thereof infringes such an intellectual property right, it will
promptly escalate its concern to the executive of the other party designated
for such escalations pursuant to Section 21.2, and the parties will work
together to make necessary changes or provide substitute Items or Products so
as to avoid infringement.  IBM may stop shipments of all such
Products without liability for failure to deliver a Product under this
Agreement for up to [**] while IBM and Apple analyze the potential infringement
and discuss whether shipments should resume. 
If a Product becomes or is likely to
become the subject of a claim covered by Section 11.2, below, IBM will, at its own expense: (i) obtain the rights and
licenses necessary to permit Authorized Purchasers and Designees to continue to
use and sell the Products consistent with this Agreement;
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







(ii)
modify the Products so they are non-infringing and in compliance with this
Agreement; (iii)  replace the Products with non-infringing ones
that comply with the Agreement; or (iv) at Apple’s request, accept the return
of infringing Products and refund any amount paid.  [**] 
If an Item provided to IBM hereunder becomes or is likely to become the
subject of a claim covered by Section 11.3, below, IBM will provide Apple
written notice advising Apple of such claim, and, [**] IBM may stop further
shipment of Products incorporating that Item or portion thereof without
liability for failure to deliver a Product under this Agreement unless Apple
has demonstrated to IBM’s reasonable satisfaction that the Item does not
infringe or has modified the Item so it is
non-infringing,  replaced the Item
with a non-infringing Item, or obtained
the rights and licenses necessary to permit IBM to continue to make, use and
sell Products incorporating the Item consistent with this Agreement. If a court
of law of competent jurisdiction determines that any Item, Product, or portion
thereof infringes an intellectual property right of any third party:
(i) either party may, in its sole discretion, terminate its obligations
hereunder with respect to such Item and/or Product effective immediately upon
written notice; and (ii) any payments [**] will be indemnified or reimbursed by
Apple pursuant to Section 11.3, below.
11.2         At Apple’s request, IBM will defend any claim that a Product sold to an Authorized Purchaser or
Designee or a Service provided by IBM or any of its Related Companies hereunder
infringes a patent, copyright, or mask work right of a third party in any country in which IBM sells or provides
similar products or services and IBM will indemnify and hold Apple and
its Authorized Purchasers harmless from any damages
assessed against them as a result of a final judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction, any settlement agreed upon by IBM in writing, and any
costs or fees reasonably incurred by them (including but not limited to fees of
attorneys and other professionals) that are attributable to such claim; PROVIDED THAT Apple: (i) promptly notifies
IBM, in  writing, of  the charge of infringement; (ii) allows
IBM to control and cooperates with IBM at IBM’s expense in the defense and any
related settlement action; and (iii) upon the written request of IBM (a) allows
IBM to modify or replace the Product in the Authorized Purchaser’s inventory at
IBM’s expense, provided that modified or replaced product meets the applicable
specifications for the Product being so modified or replaced (and returns any
such Products being so modified or replaced to IBM), or (b) if option (a) is
not reasonably available, returns the Product for a credit equal to the
purchase price of such Product.  Such
indemnification does not apply to the extent that the claim of infringement
arises from (i) modifications to any Product or Service by Apple unless
directed in writing by IBM, (ii) the combination, operation or use of a Product
or Service with a product, data or apparatus not sold by IBM to Apple, unless
the Product has no substantial non-infringing use or unless directed in writing
by IBM, (iii) modifications made by IBM to Product sold to Authorized
Purchasers and / or Designees and in compliance with Apple’s written
specification(s), except for modifications
made by IBM to standard Products; (iv) any Item that is incorporated into a particular Product or
Service with Apple’s agreement as evidenced by Apple’s execution of the related
RTM (as that term is defined in the ASIC Development Agreement, Agreement No.
000798), or (v) infringement by a non-IBM product alone,
as opposed to its combination with Products IBM provides to Apple as a system (collectively
referred to as “Apple-Indemnified Action”).
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







11.3         At IBM’s request, Apple will defend any claim that an Item provided by Apple to IBM hereunder
infringes a patent, copyright, or mask work right of a third party in any country in which Apple sells or provides
similar Items, products or services based on such Items, or products
which include the Products or output from the Services, and Apple will
indemnify and hold IBM harmless from any damages
assessed against IBM as a result of a final judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction, any settlement agreed upon by Apple in writing, and any
costs or fees reasonably incurred by IBM (including but not limited to fees of
attorneys and other professionals) that are attributable to such claim; PROVIDED THAT IBM: (i) promptly notifies
Apple, in writing, of the charge of infringement; (ii) allows Apple to control
and cooperates with Apple at Apple’s expense in the defense and any related
settlement action; and (iii) upon the written request of Apple, (a) allows
Apple to modify or replace the Items in IBM’s possession at Apple’s expense
provided that the modified or replaced Items meet the applicable specifications
for the Items being so modified or replaced (and returns any such Items being
so modified or replaced to Apple), or (b) if option (a) is not reasonably
available, returns the Item to Apple provided that Apple pays any costs
incurred by IBM in connection with reworking the Products or Services as a
result of the replacement.  Such
indemnification does not apply to the extent that the claim of infringement
arises from (i) modifications to any Item by IBM unless directed in writing by
Apple, (ii) the combination, operation or use of an Item with a product, data
or apparatus not provided by Apple to IBM, unless the Item has no substantial
non-infringing use or unless directed in writing by Apple,
(iii) modifications to any Item, Product or Service made by Apple in
compliance with IBM’s written specification(s), (iv) anything IBM provides that is incorporated into an Item with IBM’s
agreement as evidenced by IBM’s execution of the related RTM (as that term is
defined in the ASIC Development Agreement, Agreement No. 000798); (v) Items licensed to IBM pursuant to a separate agreement between the
parties; or (vi) IBM’s use of an Item
in a way not expressly permitted by this Agreement or in writing by Apple,
which written agreement would be evidenced by Apple’s execution of the related
RTM (as that term is defined in the ASIC Development Agreement, Agreement No.
000798).
11.4         Reference that Product Sales and
Manufacturing Services Agreement, Base Agreement, Agreement No. IMD001 and
Section 11.1 thereof, such Section 11.1 is incorporated herein by reference and
hereby agreed to extend to and cover, to the extent implicated in that BIAX
litigation (Civil Action No. 01-601-RRM(GMS)(MPT), currently pending in the
United States District Court for the District of Delaware and any related
action involving the same patents
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







hereafter filed), Product (as defined in
Agreement No. IMD001) provided by IBM to Apple directly or indirectly through
one or more other entities during the term of that agreement and through the
date of commencement of this Agreement. 
This Section 11.4 does not reduce or negate any other right or claim of
indemnity that Apple may have under any of the above agreements or any other
agreements or statute or common law without reference to this Section 11.4.
11.5         The
foregoing as limited by Section 12.0 states the entire obligations and
exclusive remedies of IBM and Apple regarding any third party claim of
infringement relating to any Product sold or Service or Item provided hereunder
or, as the case may have been, under that agreement referenced in Section 11.4.
12.0         LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
12.1         Neither party shall be entitled to
special, indirect, incidental, consequential or punitive damages, including
lost profits, opportunities or savings based on any breach or default of the
other party, even if such party is informed of their possibility, except (i)
[**], and (ii) to the extent such damages are awarded in a final judgment or
settlement covered by Section 11.
12.2
        In no event shall either party’s
aggregate liability to the other party for damages in connection with all claims
relating to this Agreement exceed the amount of [**], regardless
of the form of action (including fundamental breach, negligence,
misrepresentation, or other contract or tort claim), provided that this
limitation will not apply to: 
(i) the amount of any damages for bodily injury (including death) caused
by such party’s negligence or damages to real property and tangible personal
property caused by such party’s negligence; and (ii) payments owed for Products and Services provided hereunder.
This Section 12.2 also
applies to any of IBM’s subcontractors and any Authorized Purchasers.  It is the maximum for which IBM and its
subcontractors are collectively responsible, and for which Apple and its
Authorized Purchasers are collectively responsible.
12.3     Under
no circumstances is either party liable to the other for any of the
following:  (i) third party claims
against a party for losses or damages other than those in Section 11 and 12.2
(i), above; or (ii) loss of, or damage to, records or data.  Further under no circumstances will IBM be
liable when the Products or Services are used in conjunction with military,
nuclear, automotive or aeronautical applications or medical implantation or
other direct life support applications where malfunction may result in injury,
harm or death to persons, or used in any other ultrahazardous applications
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







13.0         WARRANTIES
13.1         Product
Warranty.
13.1.1      PowerPC Warranty.  IBM warrants each PowerPC Product delivered
hereunder to be free from defects in material and workmanship and to comply
with Product specifications at the time of manufacture, as agreed in writing by
IBM and Apple, for the notice period of [**] from the date of shipment.
13.1.2      ASIC Product
Warranty.  IBM warrants all ASIC Products delivered to be free
from defects in material and workmanship and conform to the Product
specifications as set forth in the RTM for the notice period of [**] from the
date of shipment. Apple acknowledges that the functionality of ASIC Products
may be contingent on Apple’s designs and, therefore, Apple agrees that such
warranty does not apply to the functionality of ASIC Products designed by Apple
and manufactured by IBM under this Agreement except to the extent the lack of
functionality is due to a defect in materials or workmanship.
13.1.3      Other Product Warranty.  IBM warrants all other standard Products
delivered to be free from defects in material and workmanship and to conform to
the Product Specifications for the notice period of [**] from the date of
shipment unless otherwise stated in an Attachment applicable to such standard
Products, and all other custom Products delivered to be free from defects in
material and workmanship for the notice period of [**] from date of shipment
unless otherwise stated in an Attachment applicable to such custom
Products.  Apple acknowledges that the
functionality of such other custom Products may be contingent on Apple’s
designs and, therefore, Apple agrees that such warranty does not apply to the
functionality of Products designed by Apple and manufactured by IBM under this
Agreement except to the extent the lack of functionality is due to a defect in
materials or workmanship.  IBM
warrants Services will be performed using reasonable care and ordinary skill.
13.2         The Product warranty does not include
defects in or failures of Products that result from (i) an Apple-supplied
design; (ii) matters not covered in the Product specification or use outside of
the intended operating environment set forth in the applicable Product
specifications; (iii) accident, disaster, neglect, abuse, misuse, improper
handling, testing, storage or installation after delivery to the carrier,
including improper handling in accordance with generally acceptable static
sensitive electronic device handling requirements; (iv) alterations,
modifications or repairs
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







 by Apple or third parties not authorized by IBM in writing; (v)
removal or alteration of labels by Apple or a third party; or (vi) failure
caused by a product which IBM did not provide or for which IBM is not
responsible.  IBM does not warrant uninterrupted or
error free operation of the Products or that IBM will correct all defects.
13.3         THE FOREGOING WARRANTIES ARE IN LIEU OF
ALL OTHER WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS OR USAGE FOR PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
13.4
        This warranty is not
transferable.  No course of dealing,
course of performance, usage of trade, or description of Product or Service
shall be deemed to establish a warranty, express or implied.
13.5         If an Authorized Purchaser or Designee
claims that any Products or Services are nonconforming, the Authorized
Purchaser or Designee shall, (i) promptly notify IBM, in writing, of the basis
for such claim of nonconformity; (ii) follow IBM’s instructions for the prompt
return of the Products; and (iii) return such Products freight collect to IBM’s
designated facility.  If IBM determines
that the returned Products are nonconforming and such returned Products were
shipped with Apple’s consent prior to their qualification, IBM’s sole and
exclusive obligation will be to, at IBM’s option, repair or replace the
defective Products, or issue a credit for the purchase price (e.g., Section
14.0 will not apply to such Product units delivered before the Product is
qualified).  If IBM determines the
Products are nonconforming and they were shipped subsequent to their
qualification, IBM will issue a credit or rebate for the purchase price.
13.6         Prior to returning any defective
Products to IBM, the Authorized Purchaser or Designee shall obtain a Return
Merchandise Authorization number (“RMA”) from IBM (which IBM will provide
within [**] Business Days of the request) and provide the specific description
of the problem, by part number for the total quantity of the defective
Products.  The Authorized Purchaser or
Designee shall only return the exact quantity authorized in each RMA by following IBM’s RMA instructions.  Each shipping container shall contain only one (1) RMA.
 
13.7         IBM’s sole liability and Apple’s exclusive remedy for breach
of warranty shall be limited as stated in this Section 13, except that Product
Failures which exceed the applicable Failure Threshold shall be governed by
Section 14 below.
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 






14.0
        FREQUENT
FAILURES 
14.1      Test Specification. 
(i) U3 and any other ASIC Product that the parties may agree to treat in
a similar manner:  Apple shall define and
implement its own design verification tests, which testing activities shall be
no less thorough than those testing activities generally conducted by Apple but
not less thorough than those testing activities generally conducted by other
personal computer manufacturers (but not microprocessor manufacturers) in the
industry (receipt by IBM of Apple’s Prototype Acceptance as set forth in the
ASIC Development Agreement, Agreement No. 000798 shall establish that the
Prototype design revision conformed with the agreed-upon specifications as set
forth in the RTM); and (ii) other Exhibit 4 
Products:  Apple and IBM shall
agree on a test specification that shall set forth the minimum level of testing
of the other Exhibit 4 Products sold hereunder both (a) by IBM prior to
shipment from IBM to Apple and (b) by Apple prior to shipment to end-user
customers, and other matters such as a returned-parts process and regular
communications expected between the parties. 
Either party shall be free to exceed the agreed-upon level of testing.
14.2     IBM will promptly notify Apple if IBM
believes that a Product contains a defect that could result in Failed Units
exceeding the Failure Threshold. IBM may stop shipments of all such Products
[**] while IBM and Apple analyze the defect and discuss whether shipments
should resume.  If the Product contains such a defect, IBM will use
diligent efforts to promptly:  (i) cure such defect and resume shipments
as quickly as possible; or (ii) make available a replacement Product that meets
the agreed specifications for the Product but does not contain such a defect.  
[**]  The modified or replacement
Products shall be fully warranted as set forth in Sections 13 and this Section
14 once qualified by Apple.   If Apple provides IBM written
instructions acknowledging IBM’s notice of a defect but instructing IBM to
resume shipments in advance of a cure or replacement, IBM will resume such
shipments as quickly as possible; provided, however that: (a) Apple’s
instructions will not relieve IBM of its obligation to cure the defect or make
a replacement part available as set forth above; and (b)
uncured Products shipped pursuant to such written instructions will be shipped
without warranty, express or implied, or Frequent Failure protection with
regard to such defect or any related defect rendered undetectable due to the
presence of such defect.
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 







14.3     If the number of Failed Units manufactured [**]
and sold hereunder exceeds the Failure Threshold within [**] of manufacture of
each such Failed Unit, Apple will promptly notify IBM specifying with
particularity the nature of the Failures. 
Upon receipt of such notice, IBM will, with Apple assistance, promptly
analyze and attempt to determine the cause of such Failures and IBM may stop
all such Product shipments to Apple [**] while IBM and Apple analyze the
Failures and discuss whether shipments should resume.  Either party may escalate these discussions to the executive of
the other party designated for such purpose pursuant to Section 21.2.
                            14.3.1      If
such Failures result from:  (i) defects
in materials or workmanship in the Failed Units; or (ii) design defects in the
PowerPC Failed Units, IBM and Apple shall promptly meet to devise a mutually
acceptable and timely plan to:
(a)           at  Apple’s option,
either replace the Failed Units (if a replacement is available), or credit the
full purchase price of returned Failed Units; and
[**]
14.3.2   If after each party has used all reasonable efforts to analyze
and determine the cause of such Failures, the cause(s) remain(s) unknown, such
Failure shall not be subject to the remedies provided in this Section and IBM
and Apple will promptly discuss appropriate ways in which they can work
together to assist Apple customers who have experienced such Failures.  If IBM disputes that a Failure has occurred,
IBM may escalate its concern to the Apple executive designated for such purpose
pursuant to Section 21.2.
14.3.3  
Repair/Replacement by Apple.  If
it is deemed by Apple and IBM to be the most timely and cost effective
approach, Apple or its authorized repair facilities may repair or replace
Failed units.  In such event, Apple will
promptly submit to IBM, in writing, the serial numbers and date codes of the
Failed Units, the date Apple received the Failed Units, the nature of the
Failures, and the date of repair of the Failed Units by Apple or its authorized
repair facility.  Apple will send to IBM
the defective replaced parts of the Failed Units.  IBM shall provide Apple with the necessary replacement parts at
no cost for Failed Units replaced by Apple [**]
14.3.4   No Liability.  The
provisions of this Section 14.3 shall not apply to the extent that defects in
the Exhibit 4 Product, or any other ASIC Product that the parties may agree to
treat in a similar manner, are due to Apple’s or a third party’s (but excluding
IBM’s subcontractors or agents) abuse, improper use, accident, tampering,
alteration or faulty repair.
14.3.5   No Waiver.  Except as
otherwise provided herein, Apple’s approval of the materials used will not
relieve IBM of its obligations set forth in this Section 14.3, nor 
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







will Apple’s approval or
acceptance of any Exhibit 4 Products, or any other ASIC Product that the
parties may agree to treat in a similar manner, which are subsequently determined
to meet the definition of Failed Units relieve IBM of such obligations, unless
agreed to by Apple in writing specifically referencing this Section 14.3.
14.3.6   The obligations contained in this Section 14.3 are IBM’s sole
obligation and Apple’s exclusive remedy with respect to such Failed Units that
exceed the Failure Threshold and shall survive termination or expiration of
this Agreement.  This Section does not
in any way alter IBM’s intellectual property indemnification obligation.  In the event that the parties agree to
Frequent Failure protection for other Products, such agreement would be set
forth in the applicable Product Attachment.
 
15.0
        TAXES
15.1
        IBM shall bill Apple for all taxes
related to any Product or Services arising from the sale of such Product or
Services to Apple pursuant to this Agreement except for taxes based on IBM’s
net income.
 
16.0         NOTICES
16.1         All communications and notices between
the parties concerning this Agreement shall be given in writing to the
appropriate individual listed below or in the applicable Attachment and shall
be deemed sufficiently made on the date if given by personal service or sent
via certified mail or receipted facsimile (sender has a receipt showing time
and date of sending and receipt by the other party) or electronic data
interchange.  Communication by facsimile
or electronic data interchange is acceptable as a “writing”.  The autographs of representatives of the
parties, as received by facsimile or electronic data interchange, shall
constitute “original” signatures.
 



Notices
  to Apple:


 


Notices
  to IBM:




 


 


 




Sr. VP of Worldwide Operations


 


TGWW Contracts and Business
  Practices




Apple Computer, Inc.


 


IBM Microelectronics Division




1 Infinite Loop


 


1000 River Street




MS:  301-4TC


 


965-3B




Cupertino, Ca  95014


 


Essex Junction, VT  05453




Fax:  (408) 974-6400


 


Fax:  (802) 769-3988




 


 


 




with simultaneous copy to:


 


with simultaneous copy to:




 


 


 




General Counsel,


 


Division Counsel



 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 







 



Apple Computer, Inc.


 


IBM Microelectronics Division




1 Infinite Loop


 


1580 Route 52




MS:  301-4GC


 


MS:  92B




Cupertino, CA  95014


 


Hopewell Junction, NY  12533-6531




Fax:  (408) 974-8530


 


Fax:  (914) 892-5358



 
17.0         INDEPENDENCE
OF ACTION
17.1         Each party agrees that this Agreement
will not restrict the right of either party to enter into agreements with other
parties for same or similar work, or to make, have made, use, sell, buy,
develop, market or otherwise transfer or deal in any products or services, now
or in the future, so long as confidential information is not disclosed contrary
to the terms and conditions applicable thereto, and unless the parties have
expressly agreed otherwise in an Attachment. 
Nothing in this Agreement or any prior discussions or agreements between
the parties will give rise to any obligation to purchase forecasted volumes, or
any volumes, of any Product.
 
18.0         UTILIZATION
OF PRODUCTS
18.1
        Apple represents that all Products
purchased under this Agreement will be: 
(i) incorporated into and made a part of Apple products; or (ii)
combined with Apple products for sale or lease as an Apple system; or (iii)
sold or leased in incidental additional quantities for sale or lease directly
to an unaffiliated third party in conjunction with an installed Apple system,
or (iv) scrapped.
 
19.0         CHANGES
TO SCOPE OF WORK
19.1         With respect to Services contracted for
hereunder, Apple may, at any time and from time to time, by written notice to
IBM, request changes to the Products, specifications or work scope.  IBM shall submit a written report to Apple
setting forth the probable effect, if any, of the requested change in regard to
the work and the effect of any change on prices or delivery.  IBM shall not proceed with any such change
until mutually agreed in writing by IBM and Apple. The parties shall promptly
amend the relevant Attachment to incorporate any agreed changes.
19.2      IBM
may implement engineering changes required to satisfy governmental standards,
protect Product or system integrity, or for environmental, health or safety
reasons (“Mandatory Engineering Changes”). 
Engineering changes affecting form,
fit, function, quality or reliability will be handled in accordance with
Standard 46-B of the JEDEC Solid State Technology Association (formerly known
as the Joint Electron Device Engineering Council) as such Standard may change
from time to time.  IBM shall
give Apple notice of any Mandatory
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







Engineering Changes as soon as reasonably
practicable.  IBM shall give Apple prior
notice of any other engineering changes affecting the form, fit or function of
a Product as set forth in the above-described JEDEC standard.  Apple will have no obligation to accept any
modified Product unless and until IBM has demonstrated to Apple’s satisfaction
that the modified Product functions in accordance with agreed specifications
and Apple has qualified the modified Product for use in Apple’s products.
 
20.0         EXPORT
AND OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND ORDINANCES
20.1         Each
party will comply, at its own expense, with all applicable United States
(federal, state and local), European Union, and other country or country group
laws, regulations and ordinances, and shall procure all licenses and permits,
and shall comply with all relevant export license terms, conditions and
provisos regardless of to whom (which party under this Agreement) the license
was issued, and pay all fees and other charges required thereby.  Such laws, regulations and ordinances
include the regulations of the U.S. Government relating to export and
re-export. Apple agrees that regardless of any disclosure made by Apple to IBM
of an ultimate destination of any Products or related technical data, or any
system incorporating them, Apple will not export, either directly or
indirectly, any Product or related technical data, or system incorporating them
without first obtaining required licenses or permits from all relevant
government agencies or departments. IBM will provide Apple with information
regarding any standard Products as reasonably required to assist Apple in
obtaining such documents and approvals. 
In addition, Apple warrants that custom Products are not for space or
missile use, do not contain encryption of a type that would violate applicable
laws if exported without approval, and do not relate to radiation-hardened
design, circuitry, manufacturing or testing. 

 
20.2         Each
party will keep suitable records to show compliance with this Section 20. At
the other’s request and pursuant to a request by a responsible government agency,
each party will demonstrate to the other that it has fully complied with the
terms and conditions of this Section.
20.3         Whenever
IBM secures an export license for a Product, the parties agree that IBM will be
the exporter of record for all exports of such Product, and the Authorized
Purchaser or Designee will utilize an IBM-approved (such approval not to be
unreasonably withheld) freight forwarder for shipment of the Product to the
agreed-upon destination point.  Further,
the parties will cooperate with one another and comply with  any terms, conditions and provisos IBM may
reasonably impose relating to the export of Product under any such export
license.  IBM agrees that it will
consult with Apple regarding any government proposed license terms, conditions
and provisos that would result in obligations for Apple.
20.4         Whenever
IBM arranges for export or import of custom Products, with respect to all
relevant governmental and administrative authorities, including the United
States and European 
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







Union, Apple: (i) recognizes that IBM may not know or
have reason to know the intended function of such Products and technical data
and must rely on Apple to provide correct information for export and import of
Products and technical data, (ii) agrees to cooperate in providing all
information necessary to determine all relevant export authorizations and to
export and import the Products and technical data, including as applicable the
Export Classification Control Number (ECCN) and subheadings, and (iii) agrees
to assist with obtaining any required licenses and authorizations for export
and import of Products and technical data and with making any required filings.
Apple shall be fully responsible for the correctness of information provided by
Apple and any Apple-authorized use of it to comply with applicable regulations.
20.5         For
the avoidance of doubt, this clause shall be considered one of the clauses
intended by the parties to survive the expiration or termination of this
Agreement under Section 21.6.
20.6         If
IBM has a reasonable basis to believe that any export license issued for any of
the Products is not being complied with in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this Section 20, IBM shall give prompt notice to Apple pursuant
to Section 21.2 of the Agreement, and shall ask that Apple provide IBM with
adequate assurance of compliance with such license terms, conditions, or
provisos.
20.7         For
purposes of this Section 20, the term “party” shall include IBM, the Plant,
Authorized Purchasers and Designees.
 
21.0         GENERAL
21.1         Neither party shall be responsible for
failure to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement due to fire, flood,
war, earthquake or other such cause beyond its reasonable control and without
its fault or negligence provided it promptly notifies the other party and uses
reasonable efforts to promptly cure such failure or delay and to resume its
performance.
21.2         The parties will make every reasonable
effort to resolve any disputes under this Agreement through negotiation.
21.3         This Section shall apply in the event
that the parties are unable to resolve any disputes under this Agreement
through negotiation.   Each party agrees
to provide the other party written notice of any such dispute.  If the dispute cannot be resolved within
thirty (30) days of such written notice, the matter will be escalated to
Apple’s Chief Executive Officer and IBM’s Senior Vice President, Technology
Group.  If they cannot resolve the
dispute within sixty (60) days of the date of escalation, the parties then may
seek to resolve the dispute through other means.  BOTH PARTIES AGREE TO WAIVE THEIR RIGHT TO A JURY TRIAL IN ANY DISPUTE
ARISING OUT OF THIS AGREEMENT.  
If Apple commences any action against IBM relating to or arising out of
the Agreement, the substantive laws of the State of New York shall be applied
exclusively to govern this Agreement without regard to conflict of law
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







principles
and the action shall be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction in the
State of New York, in which event both parties hereby consent to the
exclusive personal jurisdiction of, and waive any venue objections against any
such court.  If IBM
commences any action against Apple relating to or arising out of this
Agreement, the substantive laws of the State of California shall be applied
exclusively to govern this Agreement without regard to conflict of law
principles and the action shall be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction
in the State of California, in which event both parties hereby consent to the
exclusive personal jurisdiction of, and waive any venue objections against any
such court.  If, notwithstanding
the foregoing, a New York or California court’s judgment (with respect to
either the underlying action or any counterclaim) is not enforceable against a
party, the other party may bring such an action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.  Neither party will bring
a legal action against the other more than one (1) year after the cause of
action has been, or reasonably should have been, discovered, except for actions
for non-payment of amounts due pursuant to this Agreement (including actions
for non-payment of amounts due under Sections 11 and 14) or to enforce intellectual
property rights.
21.4         Apple may assign its rights or delegate
its obligations without the prior written consent of IBM only in connection
with a merger or a sale of all or substantially all of its assets to a third
party reasonably determined by Apple to be creditworthy.  IBM may assign its rights or delegate its
obligations without the prior written consent of Apple only in connection with
a merger or a sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the IBM Microelectronics
Division or any successor business unit thereof relating to the subject matter
of the Agreement to a third party reasonably determined by IBM to be capable of
fulfilling IBM’s obligations hereunder, provided that IBM may freely assign its
rights to receive payment from Apple hereunder to any third party.  IBM has the right to subcontract its
responsibilities under this Agreement, provided that IBM remains responsible to
Apple as provided in this Agreement with respect to such subcontracted responsibilities.
21.5         No delay or failure by either party to
act in the event of a breach or default hereunder shall be construed as a
waiver of that or any subsequent breach or default of any provision of this
Agreement.
21.6         If any part, term or provision of this
Agreement is declared unlawful or unenforceable by judicial determination, the
remainder of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect and the
parties will agree upon a valid replacement provision with like economic effect
and intent.
21.7         Any terms of this Agreement which by
their nature extend beyond expiration or termination of this Agreement shall
remain in effect until fulfilled and shall bind the parties and their legal
representatives, successors, heirs and assigns.
21.8         The headings contained in this
Agreement are for reference purposes only and shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of this Agreement.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.







21.9         The UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Goods shall not apply to this Agreement.
21.10       Each IBM Product is manufactured from
new, or new and used parts.  In some
cases, the Product may not be new and may have been previously installed.
Regardless of the Product’s production status, IBM’s warranty terms and
conditions apply.  Where a type of
service involves the exchange of a Product or part, the replacement may not be
new, but will be in good working order.
21.11       Publicity
and Corporate Communications.  Neither
party will issue or authorize any press release or publicity regarding the
Agreement or its subject matter without the other’s prior written approval,
with the following limited exceptions: 
(i) Apple will publicly announce no later than January 2003 that it is
committed to PowerPC as its strategic platform and that IBM will continue to be
a strategic supplier, (ii) Apple may make warranties or representations
regarding the Products on its own behalf provided they are consistent with
those made by IBM or supported by Apple’s own test results or analysis, and
(iii) Apple may market systems containing the Products, and make
representations and warranties on its own behalf about the performance of the
Products in those systems. This provision is not intended to
limit either party’s right to disclose this Agreement or the relationship of
the parties to regulatory agencies or as otherwise required by law.
21.12       This Agreement is not intended to and does not benefit
any party except IBM (including the Plant) and Apple (including its Authorized
Purchasers).
21.13       Neither party will have the power, and will not hold
itself out as having the power, to act for or in the name of or to bind the
other party.
21.14       Senior-Level Communications.  Apple’s CEO and IBM’s Sr. VP, Technology
Group or their designees or successors will meet at least once each quarter to
have an open and frank discussion on the state of the relationship, including any
changes in direction.  The parties acknowledge
that the schedules of these individuals can be difficult to coordinate, and for
that reason the parties agree that a failure to meet during a particular
quarter will not constitute a breach of this Agreement.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







Exhibit 1: 
Related Company Agreement Template
 



International Business
  Machines Corporation


 


1000 River Street, 965-3B 




 


 


Essex Jct., VT 05452



 
Agreement
No.____________
 
Related
Company:
 
This Related Company Agreement (“RCA”) is made and
entered into between International Business Machines Corporation (“IBM”),
{Related Company Full Name} (“{Related Company}”) and Apple Computer, Inc.
(“Apple”).  This RCA shall be effective
as of ______________________ (the “Effective Date”).
 
WHEREAS IBM and Apple are parties to Custom Sales Agreement No. 000451 and
Attachment No. 1, having an effective date of 
________________ (the “Agreement”);
 
WHEREAS {Related Company} represents and warrants that it is a “Related
Company” as such term is defined under the Agreement; and
 
WHEREAS IBM, {Related Company} and Apple desire that {Related Company} enter
into the Agreement with IBM.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties agree as follows:
 
1.  Unless otherwise defined in
this RCA, all capitalized terms shall have the meaning assigned to them in the
Agreement.
 
2.  In exchange for good and
valuable consideration, the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged,
{Related Company} is hereby deemed a party to the Agreement as of and from the
Effective Date with the same force and effect as if {Related Company} were an
original signatory.  As an additional
party to the Agreement, {Related Company} shall have the rights of and be
subject to the duties and obligations of Customer under the Agreement,
including any applicable SOW Attachments thereto.
 
3.  {Related Company}’s
Invoicing address shall be:
 
 
4.  Upon
signature by the parties, it is agreed that this RCA and the Agreement
constitutes the complete and exclusive agreement between them superseding all
contemporaneous or prior agreements and other communications between them,
written or oral, relating to the subject matter of this RCA, notwithstanding anything
contained in any document issued by either party.  This RCA may not be amended or modified except by a written
amendment signed by duly
authorized signatories of the parties.
 
5.  The parties
expressly acknowledge that they have received and are in possession of a copy
of any referenced document that is not physically attached to the Agreement and
any such item will be treated as if attached.
 
6.  This RCA
shall automatically terminate, without further notice or action by any party
hereto upon the earlier of: (a) the termination or expiration of the Agreement
or (b) at such time that {Related Company} ceases to be a Related Company of
Apple.  In the event that this RCA is
terminated pursuant to (b) immediately above, IBM and {Related
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







Company} shall have the rights and obligations as if
the Agreement were terminated pursuant to Section 7.2 of the Agreement.
 
7.  Notwithstanding the above, {Related Company}
will have sole responsibility for all of its obligations under the Agreement,
including obligations to pay for Products it purchases from IBM.
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have caused this RCA
to be duly signed by its authorized representatives as of the Effective Date.
 



Apple Computer, Inc.  


 


International Business Machines Corporation  




 


 


 




By:


 


 


By:


 




 


 


 


 


 




Name:


 


 


Name:


 




 


 


 


 


 




Title:


 


 


Title:


 




 


 


 


 


 




Date:


 


 


Date:


 



 



{Related Company name}




 




By:


 


 


 




 


 


 


 




Name:


 


 


 




 


 


 


 




Title:


 


 


 




 


 


 


 




Date:


 


 


 



 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 







Ex. 2:  Term Sheet for Designees
Term Sheet for
Designees
This Term Sheet for Designees sets forth the terms and
conditions under which a Designee may purchase certain microelectronic products
on behalf of Apple Computer, Inc. under the Custom Sales Agreement between
Apple Computer, Inc. (“Apple”) and International Business Machines Corporation
(“IBM”), Agreement No. 000451 (the “Agreement”).
1.0           DEFINITIONS
Capitalized terms in this
Term Sheet have the following meanings. References in this Term Sheet to a
gender include references to all genders, and references to the singular
include references to the plural, and vice versa.  Unless the context otherwise requires, the term “party” means a
party to the Agreement, and not the Designee. 
The words “include”, “includes” and “including”, when used in this Term
Sheet shall be deemed to be followed by the phrase “without limitation.”  Unless the context otherwise requires,
references in this Term Sheet to sections, exhibits, schedules, appendices and
attachments shall be deemed references to sections of, and exhibits, schedules,
appendices and attachments to this Term Sheet. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the word “or” shall be
disjunctive and the words “hereof”, “hereby” and “herein” and words of similar
meaning when used in this Term Sheet shall refer to the Term Sheet in its
entirety and not to any particular article, section or provision of such Term
Sheet.  Unless the context otherwise
requires, references to “IBM, and its Plant” shall be read to include “as the
case may be.”
1.1           “ASIC Products” means a custom
Product that is an application specific integrated circuit.
1.2           “Attachment” means an exhibit,
statement of work or other attachment to this Term Sheet or to the Agreement,
as the case may be.
1.3           “Business Days” means a regularly
scheduled day of work in the United States for both Apple and IBM.
1.4           “Designee” means an original
equipment manufacturer, contract manufacturer or other third party engaged by
Apple or an Apple-Related Company to manufacture Apple-branded products or
subassemblies for Apple-branded products and authorized by Apple, pursuant to
Section 2.4, below, to purchase Products and perform other tasks on Apple’s
behalf.
1.5           “Exhibit 4 Products” means those
Products identified as such in the Agreement or an Attachment thereto.  Apple or IBM will advise Designee whether a
Product Designee is
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







authorized
to purchase is an Exhibit 4 Product either in an Attachment to this Term Sheet
or in a written notice.
1.6           “Plant”
means the IBM-Related Company described in Section 2.5.
1.7           “PowerPC
Product” means a stand-alone microprocessor Product based on the PowerPC
Architecture.
1.8           “Product” means production units to
be sold or purchased under the Agreement, including the Exhibit 4
Products.  Products may be “standard”
(available for purchase by one or more customers other than Apple) or “custom”
(resulting from IBM performing Services for Apple under this Agreement and not
available for IBM’s own use (other than ordinary manufacturing activities) or
for purchase by any other customer). 
Standard Products may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
PowerPC Products and SRAM Products. 
Custom Products may include, but not necessarily be limited to, PowerPC
Products and ASIC Products.  Product
shall be designated as “standard” or “custom” in the Attachment to the Agreement
applicable to such Product.  Apple or
IBM will advise Designee if a Product Designee is authorized to purchase is a
“custom” Product either in an Attachment to this Term Sheet or in a written
notice.  Products shall not include
Prototypes.
1.9           “Purchase Order” means a written
order containing the terms set forth in Section 3.2, below, issued by a
Designee pursuant to the Agreement.
1.10         “Purchase Order Lead Time” means the
required minimum amount of time between IBM’s receipt of the Purchase Order and
the Scheduled Shipment Date.  Purchase
Order Lead Times will be established for each Product sold hereunder and shall
be set forth in an Attachment to the Agreement applicable to such Product.  Apple or IBM will advise Designee of the
Purchase Order Lead Time applicable to the Product Designee is authorized to
purchase either in an Attachment to this Term Sheet or in a written notice.
1.11         “Sales Acknowledgment” means a written
sales acknowledgment or other acceptance document issued by IBM or its Plant in
response to a Purchase Order.
1.12         “Scheduled Shipment Date” means the
scheduled date of shipment as specified on the Sales Acknowledgment and, if
later rescheduled by the Designee pursuant to Section 5.3, below, the
rescheduled date.
1.13         “Service” means any design or
engineering work that IBM performs pursuant to the Agreement.
1.14         “Term Sheet” means this document,
including any Attachments attached to or referencing this Term Sheet.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 







2.0           AGREEMENT STRUCTURE
2.1           This
Term Sheet is for the purpose of communicating certain relevant terms and
conditions of the Agreement to the Designee. 
It may not contain all terms applicable to Products purchased by a
Designee, and if there is any conflict or ambiguity between this Term Sheet and
the Agreement, the Agreement will govern.
2.2            Apple may add Attachments to this Term Sheet
to communicate Product-specific terms and conditions, such as Product descriptions, IBM part numbers, Apple part
numbers, minimum order quantities, shipment pack quantities, Purchase Order
Lead Times and prices, to the Designee. 
Such an Attachment may include additional or differing terms and
conditions from the Term Sheet, however such terms and conditions will apply
only to that Attachment.  Such
Attachments may also include any specifications agreed to by Apple and IBM applicable
to the specific work tasks (Services) or Product under that Attachment.  In the event of a conflict or ambiguity
between an Attachment to this Term Sheet and any other document, the
Attachment’s terms and conditions govern only as to the Attachment.
2.3           Except for Product part numbers, Product
descriptions (e.g. 1 GHz microprocessor), prices, quantities, bill-to
locations, ship-to locations, shipping instructions (limited to preferred
carrier, carrier account number, and expedited shipping method, if any), and
Scheduled Shipment Dates, any other terms and conditions on Purchase Orders and
Sales Acknowledgements are void and replaced by the Agreement.
2.4           Apple may, in a writing provided to
IBM, name one or more agents who are authorized by Apple to issue Purchase
Orders for Products with Apple part numbers, receive, reschedule or cancel
deliveries of such Products ordered pursuant to such Purchase Orders, process
warranty claims related to such Products and pay for such Products and any
associated freight costs (“Designees”). 
Designees are not authorized to act for Apple in any other capacity or
to bind Apple in any other respect whatsoever. 
Prior to giving notice to IBM appointing a Designee, Apple and the
Designee will have executed an appropriate agreement establishing the limited
agency described in this Section, establishing that the Designee is not a third
party beneficiary of the Agreement, protecting the confidentiality of any terms
or conditions of this Term Sheet, as well as any Confidential Information that may be disclosed to the
Designee (as that term is defined in the Confidentiality Agreement (Mutual),
Agreement No. X1329, as amended, signed by IBM and Apple with an effective date
of April 1, 1999), and securing such Designee’s agreement to be bound to the
terms and conditions set forth herein. 
No Designee may receive Confidential Information prior to executing an
agreement with the party disclosing the Confidential Information to the
Designee, such agreement including restrictions on nondisclosure and nonuse at
least as stringent as those restrictions in Agreement No. X1329.  Each Designee shall be subject to all of the
obligations and responsibilities of “Apple” under the Agreement with respect to
the terms and conditions in this Term Sheet. 
Apple may withdraw a Designee by providing IBM ten (10) days prior
written notice; and thereafter the Designee will no longer be 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







authorized
to purchase Product on Apple’s behalf or perform any other of the tasks
described in this Section.
2.5           Notwithstanding any other provision
hereof, for US sales (sales for which IBM ships to the Designee and title
transfers within the United States), the contract of sale for Products
purchased under this Agreement will be between IBM and in the case of
Designees, Apple.  For non-U.S. sales
(sales for which IBM ships to the Designee with shipment and title transfer
outside of the United States), the contract of sale for Products purchased
under this Agreement will be between the IBM Related Company that will supply
the Products (“the Plant”) and in the case of Designees, Apple.  It is agreed that all such Purchase Orders
will incorporate the terms and conditions of the Agreement whether expressly
referenced or not and will only be accepted subject to the terms and conditions
of the Agreement.  Purchase Orders will
be accepted by the Plant when it issues the Sales Acknowledgment accepting the
Purchase Order, thereby creating the contract of sale for the Products.
2.6           Any purchase order submitted by a
Designee during the term of this Agreement (whether or not it references this
Agreement) for products or services from IBM’s Microelectronics Division shall
be subject to and governed by the terms and conditions of this Agreement,
unless:  (i) there is another signed,
written agreement in place between IBM and the Designee with respect to the
subject matter of such purchase order; or (ii) the product or service was
ordered by a Designee for use in or in connection with its own or another
customer’s product and not in an Apple-branded product.  The foregoing shall be in effect regardless
of whether Apple and IBM have executed any Attachment to the Agreement specific
to the Products, or Services ordered. 
If no such Attachment has been executed, then the terms and conditions
of the Attachment most recently executed by Apple and IBM shall control, except
with respect to those matters which are uniquely applicable to the specific
Product or Service in question (such as specific NRE charges, Product pricing,
specific Items and IBM deliverables, Product names and descriptions, Purchase
Order Lead Times, and Forecasts).
 
3.0           PRODUCT DEMAND FORECASTS AND ORDERS
3.1           Each month during the term of the
Agreement, on or before the last Business Day of the month, Apple will provide
IBM a rolling Forecast of Apple’s requirements for Products, the first month of
the Forecast being the month following that month in which the Forecast is
placed.
3.2            IBM will accept Purchase Orders for
Products or Services placed by a Designee in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Agreement.  Purchase
Orders will specify (i) the Purchase Order number, (ii) the  Designee’s tax status (exempt or
non-exempt), (iii) the ship-to location, (iv) the bill-to location, (v) the
order-from location, (vi) shipping instructions (including preferred carrier
and carrier account number), (vii) requested shipment dates, (viii) the name of
the Designee’s contact, (ix) Product part numbers and the quantity ordered (in
increments of the Minimum Order Quantity (“MOQ”),  (x) the applicable unit price, and (xi) the agreement 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







number
of the Agreement.  Additionally, Purchase Orders placed by a Designee shall
clearly state that such Designee is purchasing “as the agent of Apple Computer,
Inc.”  Purchase Order
Lead Times and any applicable MOQ’s will be as set forth in the relevant
Attachment to the Agreement.  Apple or
IBM will advise Designee of applicable Purchase Order Lead Times and MOQ’s in
an Attachment to this Term Sheet or by written notice.  Purchase Orders may be rejected by IBM if
not received in advance with at least the Purchase Order Lead Time.
3.3           IBM and its Plants will respond
promptly regarding all Purchase Orders placed under this Agreement, providing a
Sales Acknowledgment accepting or rejecting the Purchase Order within two (2)
Business Days after receipt of any Purchase Order placed with the requisite
Purchase Order Lead Time and within eight (8) Business Days after receipt of
any Purchase Order placed with less than the requisite Purchase Order Lead
Time.
3.4           IBM will specify the Scheduled
Shipment Date for the Products ordered in the applicable Sales
Acknowledgment.  For Products ordered
with less than the requisite Purchase Order Lead Time, if the Scheduled
Shipment Date differs from the requested shipment date, the Designee may, at
its option:  (i) cancel all or any
portion of the Purchase Order without liability to IBM provided it does so in
accordance with Section 5.1, below; or (ii) require that IBM deliver the
Products ordered using priority freight delivery with incremental freight
charges at the Designee’s expense.
3.5           In the event that IBM determines to
discontinue the manufacture of a Product under the Agreement, IBM will provide
Apple with written notice of such discontinuance, which notice Apple may
provide to Designees authorized to purchase that Product.
 
4.0           DELIVERY
4.1
          The Designee is responsible for
all freight and duty charges from IBM’s shipping location.  Title and risk of loss will pass to the
Designee upon tender to the carrier for shipment to such Designee.
4.2           In the event that IBM and Apple enter
into an agreement to provide just-in-time delivery of Product utilizing hub
locations, Designee will be provided with written notice of the applicable
terms and conditions of such agreement.
4.3           If IBM or its Plant foresees any
supply constraint with respect to an accepted Purchase Order, IBM will provide
prompt notice to Apple and to the Designee who placed the Purchase Order.  If IBM’s supply of the Product and / or
Services becomes constrained for any reason, IBM may reduce the quantities of
Products and / or Services to be supplied to Designees.
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted information
has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







4.4           If IBM or its Plant foresees any
delivery delay with respect to an accepted Purchase Order, IBM will provide
prompt notice to Apple and the Designee who placed the Purchase Order.  [**]
 
5.0           CANCELLATION
AND RESCHEDULING
5.1           Cancellation.  Designees may cancel accepted Purchase
Orders for Products for their convenience at any time, provided they pay IBM or
its Plant applicable cancellation charges as set forth in this Section 5.1.
5.1.1        Exhibit 4 Products.  Designees may cancel Purchase Orders for
Exhibit 4 Products (and any other ASIC Product that the parties may agree to
treat in a similar manner) without charge, provided they give IBM written notice
[**] prior to the original Scheduled Shipment Date.  If the Designee provides IBM written notice canceling a Purchase
Order for such Products [**] prior to the original Scheduled Shipment Date, the
Designee will pay IBM [**] of the purchase price of the Products ordered.  Promptly after receiving notice canceling a
Purchase Order for Exhibit 4 Products, IBM will provide Apple and the Designee
who placed the Purchase Order written notice of any applicable cancellation
charges.  The Designee will promptly
after receiving IBM’s notice, issue a Purchase Order to IBM for such charges,
and IBM will invoice the same upon receipt.
                                                5.1.2        Other Products.  If the Designee provides IBM written notice
canceling a Purchase Order for any other Product, the Designee shall pay the
cancellation charges set forth in the applicable Attachment to the
Agreement.  IBM will provide Apple and
the Designee prompt written notice of any applicable cancellation charges.  The Designee canceling the Purchaser Order
will, upon receipt of IBM’s written notice, promptly issue a Purchase Order to
IBM for such charges and IBM will invoice the same upon receipt.
5.2           If a Designee cancels a Purchase
Order for Services for its convenience, IBM will cease further work in
connection with the Purchase Order and the Designee will pay IBM for reasonable
costs actually incurred by IBM pursuant to such Purchase Order before the
Designee’s notice of cancellation.  IBM
must make its claim for cancellation charges and provide supporting
documentation within forty-five (45) days of the date of cancellation.  Any claim not made within such forty-five
(45) day period will be deemed waived. 
In the event IBM is more than twenty-one (21) days late in completing a
Purchase Order for Services, the Designee may cancel such Purchase Order and
the Designee’s sole obligation will be to pay IBM for any deliverables ordered
pursuant to that Purchase Order that were actually completed or delivered by
IBM before the Designee’s notice of cancellation, provided that any periods of
such delay that were caused by the Designee shall be excluded for purposes of
calculating the length of the delay hereunder.
5.3           Rescheduling.  The Designee may reschedule accepted
Purchase Orders for Products in accordance with this Section 5.3.
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







5.3.1        Exhibit 4 Products.  The Designee may reschedule a Scheduled
Shipment Date for an Exhibit 4 Product or
any other ASIC Product that the parties may agree to treat in a similar manner
to a later date provided:  (i) it sends
IBM or its Plant written notice of the request to reschedule; (ii) the Product
being rescheduled has not yet been shipped; and (iii) the requested rescheduled
shipment date is within ninety (90) days after the original Scheduled Shipment
Date.  If the foregoing requirements are
met, no cancellation or other charge will be imposed by IBM or its Plant for
rescheduling.
5.3.2        Other Products.  The Designee may reschedule an order for any other
Product to a later date only upon prior written notice to IBM and as set forth
in the applicable Attachment to the Agreement. 
In the event of a reschedule which exceeds the rescheduling rights set
forth in the applicable Attachment, IBM may invoice the Designee the quoted
price for any Products that were delivered or ready for shipment pursuant to
that Purchase Order on the date the Designee’s notice was received by IBM or
its Plant, and the cancellation charges set forth in the applicable Attachment
for any Products on that Purchase Order that were not already delivered or
ready for shipment when IBM or its Plant received such notice.
5.4           Product Remix without Charge.  Designees may request that IBM or its Plant
ship a different mix of Products than those originally ordered.  IBM or its Plant will agree to do so without
charge provided:  (i) the Designee gives
written notice to IBM or its Plant, as the case may be, at least [**] before
the Scheduled Shipment Date;  (ii) all
substituted Products are within the same Product-family as those originally
ordered.  Products that utilize the same
design revision, materials and manufacturing process from wafer start to module
final test are within the same Product-family; (iii) the total number of units
ordered remains the same; (iv) the change will not have any significant
negative manufacturing or financial impact to IBM or its Plant in IBM or its
Plant’s sole and reasonable judgment; and (v) subject to availability of
Products that permit the requested remixing. 
Changes that do not meet the requirements of this Section may be
accepted for similar treatment in IBM’s or its Plant’s sole discretion.  If IBM or its Plant agrees to change an
order as described in this Section, as a condition of obtaining such agreement,
the Designee will promptly cancel the original Purchase Order without incurring
any cancellation or other charge and place a new one for the modified Product
mix.
 
6.0           PRICES
AND PAYMENT
6.1           Prices for Products shall be as
determined between IBM and Apple.  Apple
or IBM will notify Designee of the price of each Product Designee is authorized
to purchase.
6.2           Invoices and Payments.  IBM or its Plant shall invoice the Designee
after the Products have been shipped, or the Services provided.  Payment will be due within thirty (30) days
after the date of invoice.  Late payment
of invoices may be assessed a charge equal to the lesser of one
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







and one-half percent
(1.5%) per month or the statutorily maximum rate of interest in accordance with
the laws of the State of New York.  In
addition, if a Designee’s account balance exceeds Apple’s credit limit with
IBM, or becomes delinquent, IBM may stop shipments to the Designee or ship on a
prepaid basis until the account is compliant.
 
7.0           CONFIDENTIAL
INFORMATION
7.1           The terms and conditions and the
existence of this Term Sheet are “Confidential Information” subject to the terms and conditions of the
confidentiality agreement signed by the Designee and Apple. Designees
shall not disclose the terms and conditions of this Term Sheet to any third
party without the prior written consent of both IBM and Apple.
 
8.0           LICENSE
8.1           No license, immunity or other right
is granted herein to any Designee whether directly or by implication, estoppel
or otherwise, with respect to any patent, trademark, copyright, mask work,
trade secret, utility, model, or know-how, or other intellectual property right
of IBM.  Nothing herein shall abrogate
any rights that may arise by operation of the patent exhaustion doctrine.
 
9.0           TRADEMARK
9.1           Nothing in the Agreement or this Term
Sheet grants Designee or either party any rights to use either party’s or the
Designee’s trademarks or trade names, directly or indirectly, in connection
with any product, service, promotion, or to make any publication or publicity
without prior written approval of the other party or trademark or trade name
owner.
 
10.0         WARRANTIES
10.1         Product
Warranty.
10.1.1      PowerPC Warranty.  IBM warrants each PowerPC Product delivered
hereunder to be free from defects in material and workmanship and to comply with
Product specifications at the time of manufacture, as agreed in writing by IBM
and Apple, for the notice period of [**] from the date of shipment.
10.1.2      ASIC Product
Warranty.  IBM warrants all ASIC Products delivered to be free
from defects in material and workmanship and conform to the Product
specifications as
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







set forth in the RTM for the notice period of [**] from the date of shipment. Apple
acknowledges that the functionality of ASIC Products may be contingent on
Apple’s designs and, therefore, Apple agrees that such warranty does not apply
to the functionality of ASIC Products designed by Apple and manufactured by IBM
under this Agreement except to the extent the lack of functionality is due to a
defect in materials or workmanship.
10.1.3      Other Product Warranty.  IBM warrants all other standard Products
delivered to be free from defects in material and workmanship and to conform to
the Product Specifications for the notice period of [**] from the date of shipment unless otherwise stated in an
Attachment to the Agreement applicable to such standard Products, and all other
custom Products delivered to be free from defects in material and workmanship
for the notice period of [**] from
date of shipment unless otherwise stated in an Attachment to the Agreement
applicable to such custom Products. 
Such warranty does not apply to the functionality of custom Products
designed by Apple and manufactured by IBM under the Agreement except to the
extent the lack of functionality is due to a defect in materials or
workmanship.  IBM warrants Services
will be performed using reasonable care and ordinary skill.
10.2         The Product warranty does not include
defects in or failures of Products that result from (i) an Apple-supplied
design; (ii) matters not covered in the Product specification or use outside of
the intended operating environment set forth in the applicable Product
specifications; (iii) accident, disaster, neglect, abuse, misuse, improper
handling, testing, storage or installation after delivery to the carrier,
including improper handling in accordance with generally acceptable static sensitive
electronic device handling requirements; (iv) alterations, modifications or
repairs by Apple or third parties not authorized by IBM in writing; (v) removal
or alteration of labels by Apple or a third party; or (vi) failure caused by a
product which IBM did not provide or for which IBM is not responsible.  IBM does not warrant uninterrupted or error free
operation of the Products or that IBM will correct all defects.
10.3         THE FOREGOING WARRANTIES ARE IN LIEU OF
ALL OTHER WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS OR USAGE FOR PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
10.4
        This warranty is not
transferable.  No course of dealing,
course of performance, usage of trade, or description of Product or Service
shall be deemed to establish a warranty, express or implied.
10.5         If a Designee claims that any Products
or Services are nonconforming, the Designee shall, (i) promptly notify IBM, in
writing, of the basis for such claim of nonconformity; (ii) follow IBM’s
instructions for the prompt return of the Products; and (iii) return such
Products freight collect to IBM’s designated facility.  If IBM determines that the returned Products
are 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







nonconforming and such returned
Products were shipped with Apple’s consent prior to their qualification, IBM
will, at IBM’s option, repair or replace the defective Products, or issue a
credit for the purchase price.  If IBM
determines the Products are nonconforming and they were shipped subsequent to
their qualification, IBM will issue a credit or rebate for the purchase price.
10.6         Prior to returning any defective
Products to IBM, the Designee shall obtain a Return Merchandise Authorization
number (“RMA”) from IBM (which IBM will provide to the Designee within [**] of
the Designee’s request) and provide the specific description of the problem, by
part number for the total quantity of the defective Products.  The Designee shall only return the exact
quantity authorized in each RMA by
following IBM’s RMA instructions.  Each shipping container shall contain only one (1) RMA.
10.7         IBM’s sole liability and the Designee’s
exclusive remedy for breach of warranty shall be limited as stated in this
Section 10.
 
11.0         UTILIZATION
OF PRODUCTS
11.1
        All Products purchased under the
Agreement will be:  (i) incorporated
into and made a part of Apple products; or (ii) combined with Apple products
for sale or lease as an Apple system; or (iii) sold or leased in incidental
additional quantities for sale or lease directly to an unaffiliated third party
in conjunction with an installed Apple system, or (iv) scrapped.
 
12.0         CHANGES
TO SCOPE OF WORK
12.1         With respect to Services contracted for
hereunder, Apple may, at any time and from time to time, by written notice to
IBM, request changes to the Products, specifications or work scope.  The parties shall promptly amend the
relevant Attachment to the Agreement to incorporate any agreed changes and
provide a copy of the same to the Designee.
12.2         IBM shall give Apple prior notice of
engineering changes affecting the form, fit or function of a Product as set
forth in the above-described JEDEC standard in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Agreement.  IBM will,
thereafter, provide Designees with written notice of any such engineering
change.
 
13.0         EXPORT
AND OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND ORDINANCES
13.1         The Designee will comply, at its own
expense, with all applicable United States (federal, state and local), European
Union, and other country or country group laws, regulations and ordinances, and
shall procure all licenses and permits, and shall comply with all relevant
export
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







license terms, conditions and provisos regardless of
to whom (which party under the Agreement) the license was issued, and pay all
fees and other charges required thereby. 
Such laws, regulations and ordinances include the regulations of the
U.S. Government relating to export and re-export. Regardless of any disclosure
made to IBM of an ultimate destination of any Products or related technical
data, or any system incorporating them, the Designee will not export, either
directly or indirectly, any Product or related technical data, or system
incorporating them without first obtaining required licenses or permits from
all relevant government agencies or departments. IBM will provide Designees
with information regarding any standard Products as reasonably required to
assist Designees in obtaining such documents and approvals.
13.2         Designees will keep suitable records to
show compliance with this Section 13. At the request of either party and
pursuant to a request by a responsible government agency, the Designee will
demonstrate to the requesting party that it has fully complied with the terms
and conditions of this Section.
13.3         Whenever
IBM secures an export license for a Product, IBM will be the exporter of record
for all exports of such Product, and Designees will utilize an IBM-approved
(such approval not to be unreasonably withheld) freight forwarder for shipment
of the Product to the agreed-upon destination point.
13.4         Whenever
IBM arranges for export or import of custom Products, with respect to all
relevant governmental and administrative authorities, including the United
States and European Union, Designees: (i) agree to cooperate in providing all
information necessary to determine all relevant export authorizations and to
export and import the Products and technical data, including as applicable the
Export Classification Control Number (ECCN) and subheadings, and (ii) agree to
assist with obtaining any required licenses and authorizations for export and
import of Products and technical data and with making any required filings.
 
14.0         GENERAL
14.1         The Agreement is not intended to and does not benefit
Designees.
14.2         No Designee has the power, and will not hold itself
out as having the power, to act for or in the name of or to bind any party to
the Agreement.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed 
separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.






Exhibit 3: Apple Forecast Template
 



 


 


Oct-02


 


Nov-02


 


Dec-02


 


FQ1(CQ4’02)


 


Jan-03


 


Feb-03


 


Mar-03


 




Pro-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Server


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Pro-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




U3


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




U3 Lite


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



 







Exhibit 3: Apple Forecast Template
(continued)
 



 


 


FQ2(CQ1’03)


 


Apr-03


 


May-03


 


Jun-03


 


FQ3(CQ2’03)


 


Jul-03


 


Aug-03


 




Pro-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Server


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Pro-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




U3


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 




U3 Lite


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 



 







Exhibit 3: Apple Forecast Template
(continued)
 



 


 


Sep-03


 


FQ4(CQ3’03)


 


Oct-03


 


Nov-03


 


Dec-03


 


FQ1(CQ4’03)


 


Jan-04


 




Pro-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Server


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Pro-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




U3


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 




U3 Lite


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 



 







Exhibit 3: Apple Forecast Template
(continued)
 



 


 


Feb-04


 


Mar-04


 


FQ2(CQ1’04)


 


Apr-04


 


May-04


 


Jun-04


 


FQ3(CQ2’04)


 




Pro-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Desktop


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Server


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Pro-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




Consumer-Portable


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




PN1 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN2 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN3 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN4 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN5 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




PN6 (part # or description)


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




 


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 


0


 




U3


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 




U3 Lite


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




* Demand


 


 


 


 


 


0


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


0


 



 
 







Exhibit
4: [**]
 
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.
Such omitted information
has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







EXHIBIT 5
DEFINITIONS
AND PRICING FOR EXHIBIT 4 PRODUCTS
 
1.             DEFINITIONS
Whenever used in this Exhibit or in Exhibit 4, the
following terms will mean:
 
1.1                                 [**]
1.2                                 [**]
1.3                                 [**]
1.4                                 [**]
1.5                                 [**]
1.6                                 [**]
1.7                                 [**]
1.8                                 “Performance Milestone” means the date by
which IBM must make available a Product meeting the requirements
specified in Exhibit 4, including: [**].
1.9                                 [**]
1.10                           [**]
1.11                           [**]
1.12                           [**]
1.13                           [**]
1.14                           [**]
1.15                           [**]
 
2.                                       MICROPROCESSOR PRICING
2.1                                 Purchase Price.  The purchase price, in U.S. Dollars (“USD”), for those
microprocessor Products set forth in Exhibit 4 and purchased by Authorized
Purchasers or Designees beginning October 21, 2002 and throughout the period
covered by this Agreement will be as follows:
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.







2.1.1        [**]
 
2.1.2        [**]
 
2.2           [**]
 
3.             NORTHBRIDGE PRICING
3.1           [**]
3.1.1        [**]
3.1.2        [**]
4.             SOUTHBRIDGE PRICING
4.1           [**]
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 







PowerPC Product Attachment No. 1
To Custom Sales Agreement No. 000451
 
Attachments are
governed by the terms and conditions of the Base Agreement.  No additional signature shall be required
on Product Exhibit 1 to this Attachment No. 1 for it to become effective.  Subsequent Product Exhibits to this
Attachment must be signed by the parties to become effective.
 
 
1.0          Term
 
The term of this
Attachment is coextensive with the term of the Base Agreement.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 







Product Exhibit 1 to PowerPC Product Attachment No.
1
 
To Agreement No.
000451
 
Current IBM’s
Part Numbers, Apple’s Part Numbers, Minimum Order Quantities (“MOQ”), Shipment
Pack Quantities (“SPQ”), minimum amounts of time between receipt of Purchase
Order and Scheduled Shipment Dates (“Purchase Order Lead Time”).
 
Prices for Product
are set forth in Exhibit 5 to the Base Agreement.
 
The Products set
forth in this Product
Exhibit 1 to PowerPC Product
Attachment No. 1 are standard Products.
 
Effective Date:      October 21, 2002
 



Products


 


IBM’s P/N


 


Apple’s P/N


 


MOQ *


 


SPQ *


 


Purchase
  Order Lead Time




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]



 
 
* IBM will consider Apple requests for alternative MOQ and
SPQ quantities under special circumstances such as the discontinuance of the
manufacture of a Product pursuant to Section 3.5 of the Base Agreement.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 







 
ASIC Product Attachment No. 2
To Custom Sales Agreement No. 000451
 
Attachments are
governed by the terms and conditions of the Base Agreement.  No additional signature shall be required
on Product Exhibit 1 to this Attachment No. 2 for it to become effective.  Subsequent Product Exhibits to this
Attachment must be signed by the parties to become effective.
 
The parties recognize and agree that the development
of the ASIC Products set forth in Product Exhibits to this Attachment is
governed and controlled by the ASIC Development Agreement, Agreement No.
000798, last signed by the parties on September 26, 2001.
 
1.0          Term
 
The term of this Attachment is coextensive with the term of the Base Agreement.
 
 
[**] = information redacted pursuant to a confidential
treatment request.  Such omitted
information has been filed separately with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 







Product
Exhibit 1 to ASIC Product
Attachment No. 2
to Agreement No. 000451
 
 
U3 ASIC / Northbridge
 
1.0  Product Name and Description
 



 


Product Type:


 


ASIC




 


Apple’s Product
  Name:


 


[**]




 


Process
  Technology:


 


[**]




 


Chip Image
  Description:


 


[**]




 


Package
  Description:


 


[**]




 


 


 


 



The Product set forth in this Product Exhibit 1 to ASIC
Product Attachment No. 2 is a custom Product.
 
2.0          Purchase Order Lead Times:  (includes purchase order approval and
manufacturing lead time):
 
Production:               [**]

 
3.0          Pricing
 
Product unit pricing:  
Set forth in Exhibit 5 to the Base Agreement.
 
4.0          Minimum
Order Quantities / Minimum Ship Pack Quantities:
 
The following Minimum Order Quantities (MOQ) and  Minimum Ship Pack Quantities (SPQ) shall
apply to all Purchase Orders for Product. 
Purchase Orders must be placed in increments of the MOQ and SPQ.
 



Product


 


MOQ*


 


SPQ**




[**]


 


[**]


 


[**]



 
* units per order
** units per shipment
 
IBM will consider Apple requests for alternative MOQ and
SPQ quantities under special circumstances such as the discontinuance of the
manufacture of a Product pursuant to Section 3.5 of the Base Agreement.
 
 
[**] = information
redacted pursuant to a confidential treatment request.  Such omitted information has been filed
separately with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 











EX-14.1
4
a2124888zex-14_1.htm
EX-14.1



Exhibit
14.1
 
 
Ethics
 
 
The way we do business worldwide
 
 
Page 1







 
Contents
 



1.


Fundamental
  Principles




 


 




2.


Responsibilities to Apple




 


 


 




 


A.


Opportunity is for everyone




 


B.


Confidential information




 


C.


Public communications




 


D.


Mail
  and electronic communication systems




 


E.


Conflicts of interest




 


F.


It’s a matter of record




 


 


 




3.


Responsibilities to
  Others




 


 


 




 


A.


Putting the customer
  first




 


B.


Quality in all we do




 


C.


Using
  Apple and third-party copyrighted material




 


D.


Environmental
  health and safety




 


 


 




4.


Responsibilities to
  the Public




 


 


 




 


A.


Buying and selling
  Apple stock




 


B.


Meeting export
  requirements




 


C.


Dealing
  with government contracts and other government requirements




 


D.


Political
  contributions and activities




 


E.


Trade practices




 


 


 




5.


Compliance and
  Consequences




 


 


 




 


A.


Being vigilant




 


B.


Apple compliance




 


C.


Consequences



 
 
Page 2







 
1.              Fundamental Principles
 
Underlying the way we do business at Apple is one fundamental
principle: use good judgment.  To give a
context for using good judgment, set forth below are some of the basic legal
and ethical parameters under which Apple operates.  Apple is a publicly held company, and as such, has a
responsibility to its shareholders to pay constant attention to all legal and
ethical boundaries and to comply with all applicable laws.  Apple has the same obligation to the
communities in which it does business and to the customers with whom it does
business.
 
Although no two situations are alike, Apple aims for consistency and
balance when encountering any ethical issues. 
At the same time, Apple understands that each employee is responsible
for his or her own actions.  No one will
be excused for misconduct directed or requested by someone else.  Part of your job and ethical responsibility
is to help enforce these ethics guidelines. 
You should be alert to possible violations and report possible
violations to the Human Resources Department or the Law Department.  You must cooperate in any internal or
external investigations of possible violations.  Reprisals, threats, retribution or retaliation against any person
who has in good faith reported a violation or a suspected violation of law,
these ethics guidelines or other Apple policies, or against any person who is
assisting in any investigation or process with respect to such a violation, is
prohibited.
 
Apple employees are expected to refer to Apple’s internal Web site for
specific internal policies and procedures for implementing the general
principles set forth below.
 
The way Apple does business centers on six simple general standards:
 
•                    Apple expects its employees, including those of its
subsidiaries worldwide, and third parties with whom Apple does business, to
maintain the highest standards of business conduct.
 
•                    Apple expects its employees to be totally honest and
ethical in all Apple business dealings.
 
•                    Apple expects its employees to avoid situations where
a conflict of interest might occur or appear to occur.
 
•                    Apple expects its employees to respect the
confidentiality of Apple information and the information of third parties,
including our customers and our vendors.
 
•                    Apple conducts its business in accordance with all
applicable laws and rules, and in such a way as to attain the highest standards
of corporate citizenship, and expects the same of those with whom we do
business.
 
•                    Apple conducts its business so that the communities in
which we operate are benefited by our presence.
 
Apple may take action against any employee, independent contractor,
consultant, or other party whose actions violate Apple’s standards, policies,
or guidelines.  Such disciplinary action
may include termination of employment or other working relationship, and may
subject the person or party to civil and criminal sanctions.
 
 
Page 3







 
2.      Responsibilities to Apple
 
A.    Opportunity is for everyone
 
Apple encourages a
creative, culturally diverse, and supportive work environment.  Apple will not tolerate discrimination,
harassment, slurs, jokes or threats based on a person’s race, color, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity characteristics or expression, religion,
national origin, age, marital status, disability, or veteran status.  This applies to employees, applicants for
employment, or others who may be present in the workplace at any Apple
location.
 
Any Apple employee who
believes he or she has been discriminated against or harassed, or has witnessed
such action, is strongly encouraged to report the incident to any member of the
Human Resources Department or to any manager.
 
B.    Confidential information
 
Apple’s success is a
direct result of its technologically innovative products.  The company’s continued success and growth
depends on our ability to preserve the confidentiality of our confidential,
proprietary and trade secret information, as well as that of others in our
possession.  Each Apple employee has the
duty to respect and protect the confidentiality of all such information.  Employees (including temporary workers,
consultants and independent contractors) are expected to read and to comply
with Apple’s information protection practices, including information
classification, and procedures for handling confidential information. Employees
must also comply with Apple’s policies with respect to personal information of
our customers, in addition to complying with all applicable laws governing
Apple’s use of such personal information, worldwide.
 
No Apple employee,
employee of a temporary agency, or independent contractor shall disclose any Apple
confidential, proprietary, or trade secret information to an outside party
unless an authorized Apple representative has previously signed an appropriate
agreement or license approved by the Apple Law Department.  No Apple employee, employee of a temporary
agency, or independent contractor shall use or disclose to any other party any
confidential, proprietary, and trade secret information in Apple’s possession
belonging to a third party unless authorized by the third party to do so, and
until the party receiving the information has signed an appropriate
confidentiality agreement with Apple.
 
To protect Apple’s interests in its research and development
investment, any unsolicited third-party confidential information sent to Apple
must be refused or, if inadvertently received by an Apple employee, sent to the
Apple Law Department for appropriate disposition. Employees must be careful not
to use or disclose, at Apple, information of former employers or other third
parties.
 
C.    Public communications
 
Apple has specific policies regarding who can communicate information
to the press and the financial analyst community.  All inquiries or calls from the press and financial analysts
should be referred to the Investor Relations Department or the Public Relations
Department.  Apple has designated its
CEO, CFO, Corporate Controller, Treasurer and Investor Relations Department as 
 
Page 4







 
official Apple spokespeople for financial matters.  Apple has designated its Public Relations
Department as official Apple spokespeople for marketing, technical and other
such information.  Unless authorized by
the Investor Relations Department or Public Relations Department, these
designees are the only people who may communicate with the press and financial
analysts.
 
D.    Use of Apple equipment and electronic
systems and communications
 
Apple equipment, networks and electronic systems (such as Internet
access, voicemail, e-mail, instant messaging and AppleWeb) are provided to help
employees perform their duties while supporting Apple’s business needs, and are
for Apple business use.  Apple
equipment, networks and electronic systems should be used only for Apple
business-related purposes; incidental personal use is permitted on a limited
basis.  Use of Apple-owned equipment for
non-Apple commercial use is prohibited.
 
Apple equipment, networks, mail and electronic systems are provided for
use in conducting Apple business, so there should be no expectation of privacy
in files, voicemail, e-mail or Internet use. 
Management may at any time review and monitor any Apple equipment,
networks, mail or electronic systems, whether used for business or personal
purposes, unless and to the extent that such review and monitoring is otherwise
prohibited or limited by applicable law.
 
E.    Conflicts of interest
 
Conflicts of interest can compromise an employee’s business
ethics.  At Apple, a conflict of
interest is any activity that is inconsistent with or opposed to Apple’s best
interests, or that gives the appearance of impropriety.  The way to identify a conflict is to decide
whether there is potential for even the appearance of divided loyalty on the
part of the Apple employee.  Common
areas where conflicts of interest may occur are described below.  Although these focus on employees,
activities of employees’ family members, household members and other third
parties in significant relationships with employees should also be examined for
any circumstances which may give rise to a conflict of interest, impropriety,
or ethical or legal risks, whether real or perceived, for Apple or the Apple
employee (examples of significant relationships include domestic partners,
dating relationships, and business partnerships outside of Apple).
 
Payments
to or from third parties.  All Apple employees must pay
for and receive only that which is proper. 
Apple will make no payments or promises to influence another’s acts or
decisions, and the company will give no gifts beyond those extended in normal
business dealings.  At a minimum, Apple
will observe all government restrictions on gifts and entertainment.
 
Interests
in other businesses.  Apple employees must avoid any direct or
indirect financial or other relationship that could cause divided loyalty.  This type of relationship could include, for
example, membership on the board of directors of an outside commercial or
nonprofit enterprise. Apple employees must receive written permission from the
Apple Senior Vice President for their organization before beginning any employment,
business, consulting, financial, or other relationship with another company if
the proposed activity is in Apple’s present or reasonably anticipated future
business; uses any Apple or third-party confidential, proprietary, or trade
secret information; or relates to the services performed by the employee on
behalf of Apple.  This does 
 
 
Page 5







 
not mean, however, that family members are precluded from being
employed by one of Apple’s customers, competitors, or suppliers.
 
Corporate
opportunities.  Apple employees must not exploit for
their own personal gain opportunities that are discovered through the use of
Apple property, information, or position unless the opportunity is disclosed
fully in writing to Apple’s Board of Directors and the Board of Directors
declines to pursue the opportunity.
 
Projects or inventions. 
Before
beginning work on any project or invention, outside the course and scope of an
employee’s work for Apple, that will involve any Apple time, equipment, or
materials, or that relates to Apple’s present or reasonably anticipated future
business, Apple employees must receive the written permission of the Apple
Senior Vice President for their organization.
 
Investments.  Passive investments of not more than one
percent of total outstanding shares of companies listed on a national or
international securities exchange, or quoted daily by NASDAQ or any other
board, are permitted without Apple’s approval, provided the investment is not
so large that it creates the appearance of a conflict of interest, and provided
it does not involve the improper use of confidential or proprietary
information.
 
Market intelligence. 
Though
market intelligence is important, only authorized Apple employees should obtain
it, and only in straightforward ways. 
Apple and its employees must never accept or use information otherwise
presented.  Apple employees may not
contact competitors for market intelligence.
 
Family.  Apple employees should avoid conducting
Apple business with members of their families (and others with whom they have
significant relationships) in another company or business, unless they have
prior written permission from the Apple Senior Vice President for their
organization.  Apple employees must avoid
a direct reporting relationship within Apple with any member of their family or
others with whom they have a significant relationship.  Apple employees must also avoid any direct
or indirect financial, business, consulting, or other relationships that could
cause divided loyalty, unless the employee has first obtained written
permission from the Apple Senior Vice President for his or her organization.
 
Tips, gifts, and entertainment. 
Apple employees must not give or receive valuable gifts, including gifts
of equipment or money, discounts, or favored personal treatment, to or from any
person associated with Apple’s vendors or customers.  Such gifts (including advertising novelties, favors, and
entertainment) are allowed only when the following conditions are met:
 
•                     They are
consistent with our business practices.
•                     They are of
limited value (US$100 or less).
•                     They do not
violate any applicable law.
•                     Public
disclosure would not embarrass Apple.
•                     They are not
given to any government personnel (see the “Dealing with government contracts”
section, below).
 
 
Page 6







 
This is not intended to
preclude Apple from receiving or evaluating appropriate complimentary products
and services.  It is also not intended to
preclude Apple from making a gift of equipment to a company or an organization,
provided that the gift is given openly, with full knowledge by the company or
organization, and is consistent with applicable law and Apple’s business
interests.  It is also not intended to
preclude Apple’s attendance at social functions, provided such attendance is
approved by management and does not present a conflict of interest or the
appearance of a conflict of interest.
 
In some circumstances,
local custom in countries other than the United States may call for the
exchange of gifts having more than nominal value as part of a business
relationship.  In these situations,
gifts may be given or received only if they comply with written guidelines that
have been approved by Apple’s managing director for the country and the Apple
Law Department.  Such gifts may be
accepted only on behalf of Apple (not an individual) and must be turned over to
the Human Resources Department for appropriate disposition.  In all cases, the exchange of gifts must be
conducted so there is no appearance of impropriety.
 
No “kickbacks” of any
type may be given to any customer’s or vendor’s employees or
representatives.  No kickback of any
type may be received by any Apple employee, particularly those involved in any
Apple business transaction, including purchasing goods or services for Apple.
 
Outside vendors (including temporary agencies and
contractors).  When dealing with any outside vendors or
potential vendors, Apple employees must maintain the highest ethical
standards.  Only arm’s-length
transactions should be conducted. 
Employees of outside vendors are also expected to maintain the highest
ethical standards, including maintaining the confidentiality of any Apple and
third-party information that they receive.
 
Honoraria.  Speaking at
events, when it is determined to be in Apple’s best interests, is considered
part of an employee’s normal job responsibilities.  Because employees will be compensated by Apple for most or all of
their time spent preparing for, attending, and delivering presentations
approved by management, employees should not request or negotiate a fee or
receive any form of compensation from the organization that requested the
speech, unless the employee first receives express written authorization from
the Apple Vice President for his or her organization.
 
These examples above do
not list all possible conflicts, but do illustrate some of the conflicts of
interest Apple employees must avoid. 
Ultimately, it is the responsibility of each individual to avoid any
situation that would even appear to be a conflict of interest or to be
improper.  Each employee should feel
free to discuss any potential conflict of interest situations with his or her
manager or Human Resources, as appropriate, or the Apple Law Department.
 
 
F.    It’s a matter of record
 
Records count.  They are a vital part of maintaining a high
level of ethical business transactions. 
Apple records must be maintained and disposed of properly, in accord
with established procedures and Apple policies.  All business and accounting transactions must be fully and 
 
 
Page 7







 
accurately described in
Apple’s formal records, and payments on Apple’s behalf should never be made
other than as described in the records. 
At Apple, there is never any reason for false or misleading entries, and
there is no place for undisclosed or unrecorded funds, payments, or receipts.
 
Apple is required by
local, state, federal, foreign and other applicable laws, rules and regulations
to retain certain records and to follow specific guidelines in managing its
records.  Civil and criminal penalties
for failure to comply with these guidelines can be severe for Apple and its employees,
agents and contractors, and failure to comply with these guidelines may subject
an employee, agent or contractor to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination of employment or business relationship at Apple’s sole discretion.
 
A “legal hold” suspends all document destruction procedures in order to
preserve appropriate records under special circumstances, such as litigation or
government investigations.  Apple’s Law
Department determines and identifies what types of records or documents are
required to be placed under a legal hold. 
Every Apple employee, agent and contractor must comply with this
policy.  Failure to comply with this
policy may subject the employee, agent or contractor to disciplinary action, up
to and including termination of employment or business relationship at Apple’s
sole discretion.  Apple’s Law Department
will notify you if a legal hold is placed on records for which you are
responsible.  You then must preserve and
protect the necessary records in accordance with instructions from the Apple’s
Law Department.  RECORDS OR SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS THAT
HAVE BEEN PLACED UNDER A LEGAL HOLD MUST NOT BE DESTROYED, ALTERED OR MODIFIED
UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES.  A
legal hold remains effective until it is officially released in writing by
Apple’s Law Department.  If you are
unsure whether a document has been placed under a legal hold, you should
preserve and protect that document while you check with Apple’s Law
Department.  If you have any questions
about this policy you should contact Apple’s Law Department.
 
All Apple bank accounts
that are to be established must be approved and established by Apple’s Treasury
Department.  All payments must be made
by recorded and traceable methods: checks (correctly dated), bank drafts, or
bank transfers.  No payments shall be
made in cash, except petty cash reimbursements.
 
 
3.     Responsibilities to Others
 
A.      Putting the customer first
 
Apple creates,
manufactures, and markets computing products so people can use them to make
their lives better.  Apple strives to
understand our customers’ needs, to provide customers with the tools and skills
to enhance their use of Apple products, and to be courteous and instructive.
 
B.    Quality in all we do
 
There is no upper limit
on the quality of the products and services that we want to provide.  Employees should at all times strive for the
highest quality in all they do.  No
employee shall 
 
 
Page 8







 
knowingly misrepresent in
any way the condition of any products. 
Testing must be done in a manner that verifies that products are being
designed and manufactured to meet all appropriate quality criteria.  Accurate documentation of all tests must be
appropriately maintained.
 
C.    Using Apple and third-party copyrighted
material
 
Unauthorized duplication
of copyrighted computer software and other copyrighted materials violates the
law and is contrary to Apple’s standards of conduct.  Apple will not tolerate the making or use of unauthorized copies
under any circumstances and will comply with the law and all license or
purchase terms regulating the use of any software and other copyrighted
materials we acquire or use.
 
Apple employees sometimes
need to use or create Apple copyrighted material to perform their jobs or to
prepare Apple products and promotional materials.  Whenever Apple employees, temporary agency employees, or
contractors create an original work of authorship that is fixed in any tangible
form, the creator of the work must place Apple’s copyright notice on the work
and submit a copyright disclosure form to the Apple Law Department.
 
All Apple employees,
temporary agency employees, and contractors must ensure that they use only
authorized copies of copyrighted materials while performing their jobs.  Before an Apple employee, temporary agency
employee, or contractor uses any third-party material, an appropriate license
must be obtained.  It is against Apple
policy for any Apple employee, temporary agency employee, or contractor to
copy, digitize, modify, translate, broadcast, perform, or distribute any part
of a copyrighted work without first obtaining written permission from the
copyright owner.  It is also against
Apple policy to use Apple facilities or equipment to make or distribute
unauthorized copies of copyrighted works. 
This policy applies whether the copies are intended for personal use,
internal use at Apple, or public distribution.
 
 
D.    Environmental health and safety
 
At Apple, meeting the
challenges of rapidly expanding and changing technology means more than making
the finest products.  We strive to
produce those products in a manner that conserves the environment and protects
the safety and health of our employees, our customers, and the community.
 
To accomplish these
objectives, Apple will:
 
•                  Comply with applicable environmental, health, and
safety laws and regulations in those countries in which we do business.
•                  Adopt our own corporate standards for protection of
human health and the environment.
•                  Provide a safe work environment by integrating a
comprehensive program of safety training and evaluation.
•                  Strive to anticipate future environmental, health, and
safety risks and regulatory requirements, and have a proactive approach to
dealing with them whenever appropriate.
 
 
Page 9







 
Apple has proved to be a
leader in technology, and we believe that a comprehensive environmental health
and safety program is an essential component of our forward-looking business
approach.  Our goal of providing a safe
work environment depends on a conscientious effort and commitment to excellence
from all Apple employees.
 
 
4.     Responsibilities to the Public
 
A.    Buying and selling Apple stock
 
Apple’s Insider Trading
Policy prohibits Apple employees from making transactions (i.e., buying
or selling) in Apple stock, including options and derivatives like puts and
calls, at any time when the employee may possess material information about
Apple that has not been publicly disclosed. 
United States securities laws dictate this policy, and it applies to all
executive officers, members of the Board of Directors, employees, consultants
and contractors, including members of their immediate families, and members of
their households, who receive or have access to material nonpublic information
regarding Apple
 
In addition, members of
Apple’s Board of Directors, executive officers and other individuals with
access to material nonpublic information are subject to additional restrictions
on the trading of stock, including mandatory “blackout periods” during which they
may not engage in any Apple securities transactions.
 
Apple employees should
review Apple’s Insider Trading Policy for more information, and to determine if
they are restricted from trading during blackout periods. A copy of this policy
is available to Apple employees on the HR Web Site or may be requested from
Apple’s Law Department. We strongly urge all Apple employees to read the
Insider Trading Policy, paying particular attention to the specific policies
and the potential criminal and civil liability and/or disciplinary action for
insider trading violations which may include termination of employment. Any
questions about buying or selling Apple stock should be directed to the Apple
Law Department.
 
 
B.    Meeting export requirements
 
Export laws that control
commodities that various governments consider to be strategically important,
usually because the information and products have the potential to be used for
military purposes, regulate most of Apple’s confidential information and
products.  Compliance with export
controls is critical to maintaining our good reputation in the international
business community.  All Apple
employees, temporary employees, independent contractors and business partners
must comply with Apple’s policies when exporting Apple products, working with
technical data, traveling overseas, developing new products, and exporting
third-party products.
 
 
Page 10







 
C.    Dealing with government contracts and other
government requirements
 
Special requirements may
apply when contracting with any government body (including national, state,
provincial, municipal, or other similar government divisions in local
jurisdictions).  Apple employees are
expected to read and to comply with all applicable Apple policies and laws
relating to our dealings with governmental bodies.
 
Disclosure and certification requirements. 
In addition to Apple’s own general high standards imposed on all Apple
employees, government agencies often place special disclosure and certification
requirements on firms with which they do business.  These requirements impose on Apple employees the need to be
especially vigilant to ensure that our general business practices conform to
special government pricing, contracting, and certification requirements.  In certain situations, for example, Apple
may have to certify that it is supplying the government with its lowest price
charged to our commercial customers. 
Apple may also have to certify that its prices have been arrived at
independently, that is, without any collaboration with a third party.  Apple depends on all of its employees to
make sure that these and other promises to the government are satisfied. Any
doubts about such matters should be brought to the attention of the Apple Law Department.
 
Employment of former government employees. 
Apple is committed to observing all laws limiting the duties and types
of services that former government and military employees may perform as Apple
employees or as consultants to Apple. 
In the United States, for example, laws and regulations prohibit
employment negotiations with any government employee while he or she is
participating in a matter involving Apple’s interest.  They also prohibit a former government employee from acting on
behalf of Apple in a matter in which he or she participated substantially while
employed by the government.  State and
local employees are often subject to similar limitations.  Retired military officers have additional
restrictions on their dealings with their former service.  All questions in this area should be
directed to the Apple Law Department.
 
Gratuities for government officials. 
In additional to the limitations that exist on Apple employees when
giving or receiving any tips, gifts, and entertainment in the context of Apple
business generally, additional considerations may apply when dealing with
government personnel and their representatives.
 
Governments have wrestled
with determining when a gift or gratuity is a “bribe” or merely a
“courtesy”.  As a result, in many
instances government regulations prohibit giving what might seem like a simple
courtesy to a governmental employee. 
For example, the regulations of various United States government bodies
prohibit employees of contractor firms (firms doing business with the
government in the U.S., or a subcontractor to those firms) from providing
meals, refreshments, entertainment, token gifts, or other business courtesies
to government employees or military personnel. 
Even if a particular country does not prohibit the above activities, the
U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act places restrictions on American companies,
and their local subsidiaries, doing business with governmental agencies outside
of the United States.
 
There are some
exceptions, though.  For example, in
many countries, but not the United States, it is considered common courtesy to
provide small gifts on certain occasions to government officials.  Within limits appropriate to the country,
such gifts may be permissible (see the discussion of the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act, below).  Also, serving
lunch to participants (including government officials) in a business conference
held on Apple premises is often not 
 
 
Page 11







 
prohibited, if the
purpose is to make the best use of Apple’s time and that of any government
employee.  Seeking advice from the
government employee in advance may help to avoid embarrassment and protect the
interest of Apple employees.  In other
words, Apple employees—before offering even the most common amenities of this
sort—should check with the government employee.  If circumstances warrant, employees should check with the Apple
Law Department to see if offering the courtesy is permissible in order to avoid
situations that are potentially embarrassing or, possibly, illegal.
 
Kickbacks, bribes and the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. 
Kickbacks and bribes to obtain business are against Apple’s business
practices.  They are also against the
law in almost every country in the world. 
The U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act makes it illegal for a United
States citizen, a U.S. company and its U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries, and in
some instances non-U.S. nationals, to offer or to give anything of value,
directly or indirectly, to a foreign government official in order to gain or
retain business or to obtain an unfair competitive advantage over
competitors.  Numerous countries have
either passed similar laws or have committed to do so.
 
Apple employees may not,
directly or indirectly, offer or give any payment or other gift (including
equipment) that could even appear to be a bribe, kickback, payoff, or other
irregular type of payment to a foreign government official to influence an
official act or decision.  More
specifically, Apple employees may not make payments or give anything of value
to foreign officials or their representatives for the purpose of gaining or
maintaining business or gaining an improper advantage.
 
These prohibitions apply
to giving something to a third party, such as an agent, reseller or lobbyist,
with the intention that they give it to a foreign official or with the
reasonable belief that the third party will do so.  Before retaining third parties to represent Apple in any business
relationships with a government agency, a thorough and careful analysis of
their ownership structure and business reputation in their relationship with
the government agencies and officials must be undertaken.
 
To protect Apple and its
employees, employees must check in advance with the Apple Law Department before
giving, directly or indirectly, anything of value to government officials or
their representatives.
 
Facilitating payments exceptions. 
Payments that are customary in a foreign country and that are necessary
to facilitate or expedite ministerial actions ordinarily performed by foreign
officials—such as obtaining routine permits or licenses; processing visas and
work permits; or receiving customs, police, mail, and inspection services—are
not prohibited by the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.  In the United States, facilitating payments
are neither customary nor legal, and are not allowed by Apple’s policy.   Further, it is not generally Apple’s policy
to favor facilitating payments outside the U.S., even though legally permitted
by U.S. laws.  Therefore, all such
facilitating payments outside the U.S. in excess of US$100 require prior
approval by the Apple Law Department, except in exigent circumstances.  In all cases, such payments must be
accurately recorded in expense reports and in Apple’s books and records.
 
 
Page 12







 
D.    Political contributions and activities
 
Corporate contributions
to political causes are illegal in many jurisdictions and electoral
processes.  In those cases, no Apple
assets—including employee work time, use of Apple premises, or equipment—may be
contributed to any political candidate, party, or campaign.  Even in those cases when political
contributions are legal, no company contributions shall be made without permission
from the Apple Government Affairs Department. 
Apple employees may participate in any political activities of their
choice on an individual basis, with their own money, and on their own personal
time, subject to all applicable laws and provided that their activities
otherwise comply with Apple policies.
 
 
E.             Trade practices
 
The economy of the United
States, and of most nations in which Apple does business, is based on the
principle that competition and profit will produce high-quality goods at fair
prices.  To ensure that this principle
is allowed to thrive in the marketplace, most countries have laws prohibiting
certain business practices that could inhibit the competitive process.  Apple supports these laws not only because
they are the law, but also because we believe in the free market and the idea
that healthy competition is essential to our long-term success.  Apple employees should keep these thoughts
in mind while performing their jobs, because the penalties for violations can
be very serious—both to Apple and to the individual.
 
Customers.  Generally,
Apple may choose the parties with which it wants to do business.  Apple employees should follow established
procedures to respond to persons and parties seeking a business relationship
with Apple, and should treat all applicants with dignity and respect.  Apple may not agree with other companies,
whether they are competitors or not, to refrain from doing business with a
particular buyer or vendor.   Apple must
make such decisions independently and without collaboration with third
parties.  In certain countries, Apple
may not condition the sale of one product to a customer on a commitment by the
customer that it will purchase a second product.
 
Resellers.  Apple resellers throughout the world must
retain the freedom to establish their resale prices for Apple products.  Apple may publish suggested retail prices
and may talk with individual resellers about where market prices are generally,
but Apple may not require, coerce or threaten a reseller, directly or
indirectly, in order to get the reseller to sell Apple products at any
particular price.  Because of the
sensitivity of this topic, Apple employees must not discuss a reseller’s
pricing with any competing reseller and shall not agree with, or make a promise
to, such a competing reseller to take any action against another reseller
because of pricing activities. 
Respecting the independence of the reseller to price Apple products for
resale is a cornerstone of Apple’s philosophy of product distribution.
 
Many countries have laws
regarding the prices that manufacturers may charge resellers.  For example, U.S. law prohibits the granting
of discriminatory prices to competing purchasers of the same or similar
products if the price difference affects competition.  Similarly, under United States law, promotional allowances and
services need to be made available to all competing resellers, though the
amounts can vary in proportion to the volume of Apple products purchased by the
reseller.  Some exceptions exist to both
laws, but any exception must be carefully considered with the assistance of the
Apple Law Department.
 
 
Page 13







 
Competitors.  Apple must be especially careful when
dealing with competitors.  For example,
agreements with competitors that affect product or service pricing or output,
or allocate customers or sales territories, are prohibited, because they are
counter to the principle of free competition, and often illegal under
applicable law.  Apple employees must
not discuss these topics with competitors, because there is no way to legally
justify any understanding that might be reached that limits our competition
with such companies.  Also, Apple
employees must not discuss terms of sale, costs, inventories, product plans, or
any other confidential or proprietary information with a competitor.  In some cases, the law may also view our
resellers as our competitors when we are actually competing for the same types
of customers in the marketplace.
 
Role of Apple Law Department.  Whether
they are termed antitrust, competition, or free trade laws, the rules are
designed to keep the marketplace thriving and competitive.  The foregoing is merely a brief overview of
the many laws applicable to our business activities in the marketplace.  Understanding and applying these laws to our
business activities requires the involvement of Apple’s lawyers.  Apple is committed to compliance, and the
consequences of violations—or even the appearance of violations—can be severe
for the company and individuals.  If you
have any questions or issues about these rules as they apply to Apple business
activities, contact the Apple Law Department for assistance.
 
 
5.     Compliance and Consequences
 
A.             Being vigilant
 
It is essential that all
employees be sensitive to possible violations of Apple’s business
ethics—whether these violations occur in dealings with the government or the
private sector, and whether they occur because of oversight or intention.  Any Apple employee who has knowledge of
possible violations must notify his or her manager or the Human Resources
Department, as appropriate, and the Apple Law Department.
 
To assist employees in
the day-to-day protection of Apple’s business, below is a list of some areas
where violations of ethics policies, practices, and principles could occur.
 
Danger areas
 
 • Improper or excessive payments of any of the following:
 
 Consulting fees
 Public relations fees
 Advertising fees
 Legal fees
 Agents’ fees
 Commissions
 Insurance premiums
Other professional fees
 Expense reports
 
 
Page 14







 
 Employee bonuses or compensation arrangements
Employee loans
 Miscellaneous expenses
 Nondeductible expenses
 Director and officer payments
 
•                  Questionable payments to agents, consultants, or
professionals whose backgrounds have not been adequately investigated, who do
not have signed contracts or letters of engagement, or whose association with
Apple would be embarrassing if exposed.
•                  Payroll-related expenditures, bonuses, awards, and
non-cash gifts given to or by Apple employees without proper approval and
adequate documentation.
•                  Payments made in cash.
•                  Checks drawn payable to “Cash” or “Bearer”.
•                  Transfers to or deposits in the bank account of an
individual, rather than in the account of the company with which Apple is doing
business.
•                  Bank accounts or property titles not in Apple’s name.
•                  Billings made higher or lower than normal prices or
fees, at a customer’s request.
•                  Payments made for any purpose other than that
described in supporting documents.
•                  Payments made to employees of customers or agencies
through intermediary persons or organizations, or that seem to deviate from
normal business transactions.
•                  Any large, abnormal, unexplained or individually
approved contracts or expenditures made without review of supporting
documentation.  Specific attention
should also be given to large individual gifts.
•                  Unusual transactions occurring with nonfunctional,
inactive, or shell subsidiaries.
•                  Undisclosed or unrecorded assets or liabilities.
•                  Use of unethical or questionable means to obtain
information, including information about competitors or information about
government acquisition plans, procurement decisions, or actions.
•                  An employment, consulting, or business relationship
between an Apple employee and another company, especially a company in the
same, or a related, business as Apple.
•                    Frequent trading (buying and selling over short
intervals) in Apple stock or in the stock of a company with which Apple does
business.
 
B.    Apple compliance
 
Apple is committed to integrity in all of its dealings with employees,
customers, and the general public.
 
Voluntary
disclosures.  In accordance with Apple’s commitment to
an effective relationship with its customers, it is the Apple’s policy to make
voluntary disclosures, when appropriate, of problems affecting corporate
relationships with any client, including any government body, and to cooperate
with the appropriate government agency in any resulting investigation or
audit.  Any Apple employee who becomes
aware of possible violations of any Apple policy or practice, or of any
applicable law, rule, or regulation affecting Apple’s business, must notify his
or her manager or the Human Resources Department, as appropriate, and the Apple
Law Department.  The Apple Law
Department must also be notified immediately of any government inquiry,
investigation, audit, or other legal notice.
 
 
Page 15







 
To be sure Apple is meeting its obligations, particularly in dealing
with government customers, employees need to understand the numerous rules and
regulations that apply to their job duties. 
Employees should consult their managers or the Human Resources Department,
as appropriate, and the Apple Law Department for guidance on Apple’s and the
employee’s obligations.
 
Report
Inappropriate Behavior. Employees are required to report any conduct they believe to be
inconsistent with Apple’s policies or standards, or inconsistent with Apple’s
obligations to the government.  Reports
will be handled confidentially, on a need to know basis, so that no employee
experiences retaliation for bringing these matters to the attention of Apple
management, the Human Resources Department, the Apple Law Department or to
members of the Audit & Finance Committee of the Board of Directors.  Apple employees should refer to Apple’s
internal Web site for procedures for reporting inappropriate behavior.
 
 
Page 16







 
C.            Consequences
 
Apple expects its employees, and those of Apple’s subsidiary
corporations, worldwide, to comply with all Apple ethical and business
principles, as well as all policies, to rely on their own high standards and
reasoned evaluation in ambiguous situations, and to seek the advice and counsel
of Apple management, the Human Resources Department, or the Apple Law
Department to clarify issues not covered by this policy or good judgment.  These principles and policies are based in
part on various laws.  Violations of
those laws may result in civil and criminal penalties for Apple and its
employees.  Therefore, Apple will take
appropriate action, which may include termination of employment or other
business relationship, or legal action, or referral to law enforcement
authorities.
 
 
Conclusion
 
Apple reserves the right to change, amend, or supplement any of the
above at any time.  Additional
information on specific Apple policies for implementing the above practices is
available to Apple employees on the internal Apple web site.
 
 
 
Revised April 2003.
 
 
Page 17











EX-21
5
a2124888zex-21.htm
EX-21


QuickLinks
 -- Click here to rapidly navigate through this document

 
 
Exhibit 21     
 
 
SUBSIDIARIES OF  APPLE COMPUTER, INC*     



Name 
 
Jurisdiction
of Incorporation


Apple Computer Inc. Limited
 
Ireland


Apple Computer Limited
 
Ireland


Apple Computer International
 
Ireland


Apple Japan Inc.
 
Japan





*Pursuant
to Item 601(b)(21)(ii) of Regulation S-K, the names of other subsidiaries of Apple Computer, Inc. are omitted because, considered in the
aggregate, they would not constitute a significant subsidiary as of the end of the year covered by this report. 




QuickLinks

Exhibit 21

SUBSIDIARIES OF APPLE COMPUTER, INC





EX-23.1
6
a2124888zex-23_1.htm
EX-23.1


QuickLinks
 -- Click here to rapidly navigate through this document

 
 
Exhibit 23.1     
 
 
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' CONSENT     
The
Board of Directors
Apple Computer, Inc.: 
We
consent to the incorporation by reference in the registration statements on Forms S-8 (Numbered 2-70449, 2-77563, 2-85095,
33-00866, 33-23650, 33-31075, 33-40877, 33-47596, 33-57092, 33-57080, 33-53873, 33-53879,
33-53895, 33-60279, 33-60281, 333-07437, 333-23719, 333-23725, 333-60455, 333-82603,
333-93471, 333-37012, 333-52116, 333-61276, 333-70506, 333-75930, 333-102184 and 333-106421) and the
registration statements on Forms S-3 (Numbered 33-23317, 33-29578 and 33-62310) of Apple Computer, Inc. of our report dated October 14,
2003 relating to the consolidated balance sheets of Apple Computer, Inc. and subsidiaries as of September 27, 2003 and September 28, 2002, and the related consolidated statements
of operations, shareholders' equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended September 27, 2003, which report appears in the September 27, 2003
annual report on Form 10-K of Apple Computer, Inc. Our report refers to changes in accounting for asset retirement obligations and for financial instruments with
characteristics of both liabilities and equity in 2003, for goodwill in 2002, and for hedging activities in 2001. 



 
/s/  KPMG LLP      


Mountain View, California
December 18, 2003
 







QuickLinks

Exhibit 23.1

INDEPENDENT AUDITORS' CONSENT





EX-31.1
7
a2124888zex-31_1.htm
EX-31.1


QuickLinks
 -- Click here to rapidly navigate through this document

 
 
Exhibit 31.1     
 
 
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER     
I,
Steven P. Jobs, certify that: 

1.I
have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Apple Computer, Inc.;
2.Based
on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of
the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual report;
3.Based
on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this annual report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual report;
4.The
registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and have:


a)Designed
such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating
to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)Evaluated
the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
c)Disclosed
in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and

5.The
registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's auditors and the
audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):


a)All
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal controls over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)Any
fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting. 

December 18,
2003 



 
 
By:
/s/  STEVEN P. JOBS       Steven P. Jobs
Chief Executive Officer







QuickLinks

Exhibit 31.1

CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER





EX-31.2
8
a2124888zex-31_2.htm
EX-31.2


QuickLinks
 -- Click here to rapidly navigate through this document

 
 
Exhibit 31.2     
 
 
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER     
I,
Fred D. Anderson, certify that: 

1.I
have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Apple Computer, Inc.;
2.Based
on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of
the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this annual report;
3.Based
on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this annual report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this annual report;
4.The
registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-14 and 15d-14) for the registrant and have:


a)Designed
such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating
to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this annual report is being prepared;
b)Evaluated
the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
c)Disclosed
in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's fourth fiscal quarter that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal control over financial reporting; and

5.The
registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's auditors and the
audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):


a)All
significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal controls over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the
registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)Any
fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting. 

December 18,
2003 



 
 
By:
/s/  FRED D. ANDERSON       Fred D. Anderson
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer







QuickLinks

Exhibit 31.2

CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER





EX-32.1
9
a2124888zex-32_1.htm
EX-32.1


QuickLinks
 -- Click here to rapidly navigate through this document

 
 
Exhibit 32.1     
 
 
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER  PURSUANT TO  18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,  AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO  SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002     
I, Steven P. Jobs, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that the Annual Report of
Apple Computer, Inc. on Form 10-K for the period ended September 27, 2003 fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 and that information contained in such Form 10-K fairly presents in all material respects the financial condition and results of operations of Apple
Computer, Inc. 



 
 
By:
/s/  STEVEN P. JOBS       Steven P. Jobs
Chief Executive Officer



I,
Fred D. Anderson, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that the Annual Report of Apple
Computer, Inc. on Form 10-K for the period ended September 27, 2003 fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 and that information contained in such Form 10-K fairly presents in all material respects the financial condition and results of operations of Apple
Computer, Inc. 



 
 
By:
/s/  FRED D. ANDERSON       Fred D. Anderson
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer







QuickLinks

Exhibit 32.1

CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350, AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002





-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
